    Here is full text of 'On the Advantage and Disadvantage Of History' by Nietzsche: 
Full text of "Nietzsche On The Advantage And Disadvantage Of History For Life"
See other formats
Friedrich 

Nietzsche 




On the 
Advantage 

and 
Disadvantage 








FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE 


On the 
Advantage 
and 

Disadvantage 
of History 
for Life 


Translated, with an Introduction, 

by Peter Preuss 


HACKETT PUBLISHING COMPANY, INC. 


Friedrich Nietzsche: 1844-1900 

Von Nutzen und Nachteil der Histone fur das Leben was 
first published in 1874. 


Copyright © 1980 by Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 
All rights reserved 

Cover design by Richard L. Listenberger 
Interior design by James N. Rogers 
Printed in the United States of America 
Fourth Printing, 1986 


For further information, please address 
Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. 

Box 55573, Indianapolis, Indiana 46205 


Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data 

Nietzsche, Friedrich Wilhelm, 1844-1900. 

On the advantage and disadvantage of history for 
life. 

Translation of the author's Vom Nutzen und Nachteil 
der Historie fur das Leben, which is part 2 of his 
Unzeitgemasse Betrachtungen. 

1. Strauss, David Friedrich, 1808-1874. 

2. History—Study and teaching. 3. Schopenhauer, 
Arthur, 1788-1860. 4. Wagner, Richard, 1813-1883. 

I. Title. 

B3313.U52E5 1980 128 80-16686 

ISBN 0-915144-95-6 
ISBN 0-915144-94-8 (pbk.) 


CONTENTS 


Introduction 1 
Translator's Note 4 

ON THE ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE 
OF HISTORY FOR LIFE 


Preface . 7 

§1 . 8 

§2 .14 

§3 .19 

§4 . 22 

§5 .28 

§6 .32 

§7 .38 

§8 .43 

§9 .49 

§10 .58 













INTRODUCTION 


Man, unlike the animal, is self-conscious. He is aware that he is alive 
and that he must die. And because he is self-conscious he is not only aware 
of living, but of living well or badly. Life is not wholly something that 
happens to man; it is also something he engages in according to values he 
follows. Human existence is a task. In the past two centuries or so of Euro¬ 
pean philosophizing there have been a number of attempts to clarify this 
task: the Hegelian elevation of individual finitude into infinity in the Ab¬ 
solute; the Kierkegaardian life of inwardness; and the Heideggerian 
authentic life of preparation for the self-revelation of Being, among others. 

Nietzsche, too, understands human existence to be a task. He calls it 
simply the task of living. As with any genuine philosophy of this kind, his 
attempt to clarify philosophically the task of human existence is itself 
always a part of that task. It is not written from an assumed standpoint 
outside of human existence, merely viewing that existence dispassionately 
and objectively, but is written from the standpoint of a human being 
engaged in this task, fully aware that he is so engaged. 

Not only is Nietzsche aware that philosophizing is part of the task of ex¬ 
istence; he also insists that every human enterprise is a part of the task. 
Whatever a person does finally receives its meaning only so far as it is in¬ 
tegrated into the total task of existing. If it fails to further this task it is 
valueless. If it hinders this task it is to be rejected. 

The topic of the present work is the relation between life and historical 
knowledge. The quest for knowledge and truth is also a part of the task of 
existing and, like every human enterprise, it receives its value from being 
integrated into the task of which it is a part. But what if some knowledge, 
some truth, should prove deadly? What if, with respect to some 
knowledge, we are faced with the alternative: know the truth and die or 
live and remain in error? According to Nietzsche we are faced with this 
alternative., But given the choice between life and knowledge, he argues, 
there is no question about which we ought to choose. Any knowledge 
which destroys life destroys itself, for knowledge presupposes life. 

The nineteenth century had discovered history and all subsequent in¬ 
quiry and education bore the stamp of this discovery. This was not simply 
the discovery of a set of facts about the past but the discovery of the 
historicity of man: man, unlike the animal, is a historical being. Man is 
not wholly the product of an alien act, either natural or divine, but in part 
produces his own being. The task of existing is a task precisely because it is 
not a case of acting according to a permanent nature or essence but rather 
of producing that nature within the limitations of a situation. History is 
the record of this self-production; it is the activity of a historical being 
recovering the past into a present which anticipates the future. With a 


1 


2 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


total absence of this activity man would fall short of humanity: history is 
necessary. 

But what if this activity is perverted? What if, rather than remaining the 
life-promoting activity of a historical being, history is turned into the ob¬ 
jective uncovering of mere facts by the disinterested scholar — facts to be 
left as they are found, to be contemplated without being assimilated into 
present being? According to Nietzsche, this perversion has taken place — 
and history, rather than promoting life, has become deadly. This, then, is 
the dilemma Nietzsche faced: history is necessary, but as it is practiced it is 
deadly. The present work is an attempt to extricate himself, and us, from 
this dilemma. 

For Nietzsche, as for almost every post-Kantian European philosopher, 
philosophizing is part of the task of existing. That it is such a part shows 
up in different ways: as dialectical philosophizing in Hegel; as irony and 
multiple pseudonyms in Kierkegaard; as revolutionary pamphleteering in 
Marx; as prophetic paths of thinking in Heidegger. In Nietzsche it shows 
up in the experimental character of his philosophizing. His chief concern 
with a philosophical position is not so much its intellectual cogency as its 
ability to stand the test of living by it. This is why, by quoting Nietzsche 
selectively, one can make a case for the most divergent sorts of positions. 
For example, the present work is a fine example of Nietzsche's early period 
(The Birth of Tragedy , the four Untimely Observations of which the pres¬ 
ent work is the second). Here he condemns objective scholarship as 
detrimental to human life which must flourish, if need be, in an at¬ 
mosphere of error and illusion. But his middle period (Human, All Too 
Human; Dawn of Day; The Gay Science) commences with a radical shift 
in favour of objective science and the exposing of all illusion. It ends, 
however, with the tragic realization that God has been killed in the process 
(The Gay Science #125). Having experimented with these two antithetical 
positions, he understands that neither is tenable. Only a product of their 
reconciliation can be tenable, and he attempts to achieve this in his late 
period (Thus Spoke Zarathustra; Beyond Good and Evil; The Genealogy 
of Morals; The Antichrist; Twilight of the Idols). It is because the recon¬ 
ciliation of the late period appears to favour the position of the early 
period that Nietzsche's middle period has been unduly neglected in favour 
of the other two. This is unfortunate. But just as unfortunate is the recent 
about-face in Germany of elevating his middle period to the status of the 
authentic Nietzschean philosophy and downgrading the rest as either the 
product of youthful exuberance or tottering reason. Only the total Nietz¬ 
sche is the total Nietzsche. 

On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life is an excellent 
point of entry into the philosophy of Nietzsche. Not only does it sound 
many of the main points of the whole, but is a clear statement of the pro- 


Introduction 


3 


foundest concerns which animate the whole. If it is understood for what it 
is it can, better than any other work, provide the foundation for an ap¬ 
propriating study of this powerful thinker. 


The University of Lethbridge 


Peter Preuss 


ON THE ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE 
OF HISTORY FOR LIFE 


Preface 

''Moreover I hate everything which merely instructs me without increas¬ 
ing or directly quickening my activity." These are Goethe's words with 
which, as with a boldly expressed ceterum censeo, 1 we may begin our con¬ 
sideration of the worth and worthlessness of history. Our aim will be to 
show why instruction which fails to quicken activity, why knowledge 
which enfeebles activity, why history as a costly intellectual excess and 
luxury must, in the spirit of Goethe's words, be seriously hated; for we still 
lack what is most necessary, and superfluous excess is the enemy of the 
necessary. Certainly we need history. But our need for history is quite dif¬ 
ferent from that of the spoiled idler in the garden of knowledge, even if he 
in his refinement looks down on our rude and graceless requirements and 
needs. That is, we require history for life and action, not for the smug 
avoiding of life and action, or even to whitewash a selfish life and coward¬ 
ly, bad acts. Only so far as history serves life will we serve it: but there is a 
degree of doing history and an estimation of it which brings with it a 
withering and degenerating of life: a phenomenon which is now as 
necessary as it may be painful to bring to consciousness through some 
remarkable symptoms of our age. 

I have made an effort to describe a feeling which has tortured me often 
enough; I revenge myself .on it by making it public. Perhaps this descrip¬ 
tion will give someone occasion to explain to me that he too knows this 
feeling but that I have not felt it purely and originally enough and have 
quite failed to articulate it with the confidence and mature experience due 
it. A few may think so perhaps; but most will tell me that this is a quite 
perverted, unnatural, repulsive and downright impermissible feeling, even 
that with this feeling I have shown myself to be quite unworthy of the 
mighty historical orientation of the age which, as is well known, has been 
evident for two generations particularly among the Germans. At any rate, 
my daring to come forward with a natural description of my feeling will 
sooner promote than injure general propriety, for in doing so I give oppor¬ 
tunity to many to pay compliments to this orientation of the age. For my 


1. This is an allusion to Cato's "Ceterum censeo Carthaginem esse delendam" ("Moreover I 
am of the opinion that Carthage be destroyed") with which he used to conclude every speech 
on any topic whatever until he finally goaded the Romans into the third Punic War. 


7 


8 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


part, however, I gain something I value more highly than general pro¬ 
priety—public instruction and correction about our age. 

These reflections are also untimely, because I attempt to understand as a 
defect, infirmity and shortcoming of the age something of which our age is 
justifiably proud, its historical education. I even believe that all of us suf¬ 
fer from a consuming historical fever and should at least realize that we 
suffer from it. If Goethe has said with good reason that with our virtues 
we also cultivate our faults, and if, as everyone knows, a hypertrophic 
virtue—which the historical sense of our age seems to me to be—may 
bring about the decay of a people as much as a hypertrophic vice, one may 
as well allow me my say. I should not hide the exonerating circumstance 
that I have for the most part taken the experiences which those painful 
feelings occasioned in me from myself and have considered those of others 
only for the sake of comparison; and that further, only so far as I am the 
nursling of more ancient times, especially the Greek, could I come to have 
such untimely experiences about myself as a child of the present age. That 
much I must be allowed to grant myself on the grounds of my profession 
as a classical philologist. For I do not know what meaning classical 
philology would have for our age if not to have an untimely effect within 
it, that is, to act against the age and so have an effect on the age to the ad¬ 
vantage, it is to be hoped, of a coming age. 

1 

Consider the herd grazing before you. These animals do not know what 
yesterday and today are but leap about, eat, rest, digest and leap again; 
and so from morning to night and from day to day, only briefly concerned 
with their pleasure and displeasure, enthralled by the moment and for that 
reason neither melancholy nor bored. It is hard for a man to see this, for 
he is proud of being human and not an animal and yet regards its hap¬ 
piness with envy because he wants nothing other than to live like the 
animal, neither bored nor in pain, yet wants it in vain because he does not 
want it like the animal. Man may well ask the animal: why do you not 
speak to me of your happiness but only look at me? The animal does want 
to answer and say: because I always immediately forget what I wanted to 
say—but then it already forgot this answer and remained silent: so that 
man could only wonder. 

But he also wondered about himself, that he cannot learn to forget but 
always remains attached to the past: however far and fast he runs, the 
chain runs with him. It is astonishing: the moment, here in a wink, gone in 
a wink, nothing before and nothing after, returns nevertheless as a spectre 
to disturb the calm of a later moment. Again and again a page loosens in 
the scroll of time, drops out, and flutters away—and suddenly flutters 


§1 


9 


back again into man's lap. Then man says "I remember" and envies the 
animal which immediately forgets and sees each moment really die, sink 
back into deep night extinguished for ever. In this way the animal lives 
unhistorically : for it goes into the present like a number without leaving a 
curious fraction; it does not know how to dissimulate, hides nothing, ap¬ 
pears at every moment fully as what it is and so cannot but be honest. 
Man on the other hand resists the great and ever greater weight of the past: 
this oppresses him and bends him sideways, it encumbers his gait like an 
invisible and sinister burden which, for the sake of appearances, he may 
deny at times and which in intercourse with his equals he is all too pleased 
to deny: to excite their envy. This is why he is moved, as though he 
remembered a lost paradise, when he sees a grazing herd, or, in more in¬ 
timate proximity, sees a child, which as yet has nothing past to deny, play¬ 
ing between the fences of past and future in blissful blindness. And yet the 
child's play must be disturbed: only too soon will it be called out of its 
forgetfulness. Then it comes to understand the phrase "it was", that 
password with which struggle, suffering and boredom approach man to 
remind him what his existence basically is—a never to be completed im¬ 
perfect tense. And when death finally brings longed-for forgetfulness it 
also robs him of the present and of existence and impresses its seal on this 
knowledge: that existence is only an uninterrupted having-been, a thing 
which lives by denying itself, consuming itself, and contradicting itself. 

If, in any sense, it is some happiness or the pursuit of happiness which 
binds the living being to life and urges him to live, then perhaps no 
philosopher is closer to the truth than the cynic: for the happiness of the 
animal, that thorough cynic, is the living proof of the truth of cynicism. 
The least happiness, if only it keeps one happy without interruption, is in¬ 
comparably more than the greatest happiness which comes to one as a 
mere episode, as a mood, a frantic incursion into a life of utter displeasure, 
desire and privation. With the smallest as with the greatest happiness, 
however, there is always one thing which makes it happiness: being able 
to forget or, to express it in a more learned fashion, the capacity to live 
unhistorically while it endures. Whoever cannot settle on the threshold of 
the moment forgetful of the whole past, whoever is incapable of standing 
on a point like a goddess of victory without vertigo or fear, will never 
know what happiness is, and worse yet, will never do anything to make 
others happy. Take as an extreme example a man who possesses no trace 
of the power to forget, who is condemned everywhere to see becoming: 
such a one no longer believes in his own existence, no longer believes in 
himself; he sees everything flotv apart in mobile points and loses himself in 
the stream of becoming: he will, like the true pupil of Heraclitus, 2 hardly 

2. The allusion is to Cratylus who is said to have come to the view that, since no true state¬ 
ment can be made about a thing that is always changing, one ought not to say anything but 
only move one's finger. Cf. Aristotle, Metaphysics, 5, 1013 al3. 


10 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


dare in the end to lift a finger. All acting requires forgetting, as not only 
light but also darkness is required for life by all organisms. A man who 
wanted to feel everything historically would resemble someone forced to 
refrain from sleeping, or an animal expected to live only from ruminating 
and ever repeated ruminating. So: it is possible to live with almost no 
memories, even to live happily as the animal shows; but without forget¬ 
ting it is quite impossible to live at all. Or, to say it more simply yet: there 
is a degree of insomnia, of rumination , of historical sense which injures 
every living thing and finally destroys it, be it a man, a people or a culture. 

To determine this degree, and through it the limit beyond which the past 
must be forgotten if it is not to become the gravedigger of the present, one 
would have to know precisely how great the plastic power of a man, a 
people or a culture is. I mean the power distinctively to grow out of itself, 
transforming and assimilating everything past and alien, to heal wounds, 
replace what is lost and reshape broken forms out of itself. There are men 
who have this power to so small a degree that they will incurably bleed to 
death over a single experience, a single pain, frequently over a single 
delicate injustice, as from quite a small bleeding laceration. On the other 
hand there are those who are affected so little by the wildest and most 
gruesome calamities of life and even by their own malicious acts, that in 
midst of them or shortly thereafter they achieve a tolerable degree of well¬ 
being and a kind of clear conscience. The stronger the roots of the inmost 
nature of a man are, the more of the past will he appropriate or master; 
and were one to conceive the most powerful and colossal nature, it would 
be known by this, that for it there would be no limit at which the historical 
sense could overgrow and harm it; such a nature would draw its own as 
well as every alien past wholly into itself and transform it into blood, as it 
were. What such a nature cannot master it knows how to forget; it no 
longer exists, the horizon is closed and whole, and nothing can serve as a 
reminder that beyond this horizon there remain men, passions, doctrines 
and purposes. And this is a general law: every living thing can become 
healthy, strong and fruitful only within a horizon; if it is incapable of 
drawing a horizon around itself or, on the other hand, too selfish to 
restrict its vision to the limits of a horizon drawn by another, it will wither 
away feebly or overhastily to its early demise. Cheerfulness, clear con¬ 
science, the carefree deed, faith in the future, all this depends, in the case 
of an individual as well as of a people, on there being a line which 
distinguishes what is clear and in full view from the dark and unil- 
luminable; it depends on one's being able to forget at the right time as 
well as to remember at the right time; on discerning with strong instinctual 
feelings when there is need to experience historically and when unhis- 
torically. Precisely this is the proposition the reader is invited to consider: 
the unhistorical and the historical are equally necessary for the health of 
an individual, a people and a culture. 


§1 


11 


Everyone will have made the following observation: a man's historical 
knowledge and perception may be very limited, his horizon as restricted as 
that of a resident of an alpine valley, into every judgement he may in¬ 
troduce an injustice, into every experience the error of being the first to 
have that experience—and despite all injustice and all error he stands firm¬ 
ly in indefatigable health and vigour, a pleasure to behold; while right 
beside him the man of greater justice and learning deteriorates and 
crumbles because the lines of his horizon restlessly shift again and again, 
because he cannot extricate himself from the much more delicate network 
of his justice and truths in order to engage in rude willing and desiring. We 
have seen, however, that the animal, which is quite unhistorical and lives 
within a horizon which is almost a point, nevertheless is in a certain sense 
happy, or at least lives without boredom and dissimulation. We must then 
consider the capacity to perceive unhistorically to a certain degree as the 
more important and fundamental so far as it provides the foundation upon 
which alone something right, healthy and great, something truly human 
may grow. The unhistorical resembles an enveloping atmosphere in which 
alone life is generated only to disappear again with the destruction of this 
atmosphere. It is true: only so far as man, by thinking, reflecting, compar¬ 
ing, dividing and joining, limits that unhistorical element; only so far as a 
bright lightning flash of light occurs within that encircling cloud of 
mist—that is, only through the power to use the past for life and to 
refashion what has happened into history, does man become man: but 
with an excess of history man ceases again, and without that cloak of the 
unhistorical he would never have begun and dared to begin. Where are 
there deeds which a man might have done without first having entered the 
mist of the unhistorical? Or, leaving images aside, to illustrate with an ex¬ 
ample: think of a man tossed and torn by a powerful passion for a woman 
or a great thought: how his world is changed! Glancing backwards he feels 
blind, listening sideways he hears what is foreign as a dull meaningless 
sound; what he perceives at all he has never perceived so before, so 
tangibly near, coloured, full of sound and light as though he were ap¬ 
prehending it with all his senses at once. All evaluations are changed and 
devalued; there is so much he can no longer value because he can hardly 
feel it: he asks himself whether he has been fooled the whole time by alien 
words and alien opinions; he is astonished that his memory so tirelessly 
runs in circles and is yet too weak and too tired to leap even once out of 
this circle. It is the most unjust condition in the world, narrow, ungrateful 
to the past, blind to dangers, deaf to warnings, a little living whirlpool in a 
dead sea of night and forgetting: and yet this condition—unhistorical, 
contra-historical through and through—is the cradle not only of an unjust, 
but rather of every just deed; and no artist will paint his picture, no 
general achieve victory nor any people its freedom without first having 
desired and striven for it in such an unhistorical condition. As the man of 


12 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


action, according to Goethe's 3 phrase, is always without conscience, so he 
is also without knowledge; he forgets a great deal to do one thing, he is un¬ 
just to what lies behind him and knows only one right, the right of that 
which is to become. So the agent loves his deed infinitely more than it 
deserves to be loved: and the best deeds occur in such an exuberance of 
love that of this love, at least, they must be unworthy even if their value is 
otherwise immeasurably great. 

If someone could, in numerous instances, discern and breathe again the 
unhistorical atmosphere in which every great historical event came to be, 
then such a one might, as a cognitive being, perhaps elevate himself to a 
superhistorical standpoint such as Niebuhr 4 once described as the possible 
result of historical observation. "History", he says, "clearly and explicitly 
comprehended, has at least this one use: that one knows how even the 
greatest and highest spirits of humanity do not know how accidentally 
their vision adopted the form through which they see and through which 
they vehemently insist that everyone else see; vehemently that is, since the 
intensity of their consciousness is exceptionally great. Whoever does not 
know this and has not comprehended it quite definitely and in many in¬ 
stances will be subjugated by the appearance of a mighty spirit who brings 
the highest passion into a given form." One could call such a standpoint 
superhistorical, because one who has adopted it could no longer be 
tempted at all to continue to live and cooperate in making history, since he 
would have understood that blindness and injustice in the soul of each 
agent as the condition of all activity; he would even be cured henceforth of 
taking history excessively seriously: for he would have learned, with 
regard to each person and each experience, to answer his question about 
how and why people live, whether among Greeks or Turks, whether in an 
hour of the first century or the nineteenth. Whoever asks his acquain¬ 
tances whether they would want to relive the last ten or twenty years will 
notice quite readily which of them is prepared for the superhistorical 
standpoint: they will, of course, all answer No!, but they will give dif¬ 
ferent reasons for this No! The reason of some may be that they take com¬ 
fort in the hope that the next twenty years will be better; it is they whom 
David Hume ridicules when he says: 

And from the dregs of life hope to receive, 

What the first sprightly running could not give. 5 


3. "The man of action is always without conscience; no one has a conscience except the 
observer." From "Spruche in Prosa", quoted in Gedanken aus Goethe's Werken, ed. Her¬ 
mann Levi, F. Bruckmann A.G., Munich, n.d. 4th edition, p. 80. 

4. I believe that Barthold Georg Niebuhr is meant. 

5. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion , Part X, quoted with slight alteration from John 
Dryden, Aureng-Zebe, Act IV, Scene 1. 


§1 


13 


Let us call them the historical men. Looking into the past urges them 
toward the future, incites them to take courage and continue to engage in 
life, and kindles the hope that things will yet turn out well and that hap¬ 
piness is to be found behind the mountain toward which they are striding. 
These historical men believe that ever more light is shed on the meaning of 
existence in the course of its process , and they look back to consider that 
process only to understand the present better and learn to desire the future 
more vehemently. They do not know how unhistorically they think and 
act despite all their history, and how even their concern with his¬ 
toriography does not serve pure knowledge but life. 

But the question whose first answer we have heard may also be 
answered differently. Of course again with a No!—but this time for dif¬ 
ferent reasons. With the No of the superhistorical man who does not see 
salvation in the process, for whom, rather, the world is complete and 
achieves its end at every single moment. What could ten new years teach 
that the past ten were incapable of teaching! 

Superhistorical men have never agreed whether the significance of the 
teaching is happiness or resignation, virtue or penance; but, opposed to all 
historical ways of viewing the past, they are quite unanimous in accepting 
the following proposition: the past and the present is one and the same, 
that is, typically alike in all manifold variety and, as omnipresence of im¬ 
perishable types, a static structure of unchanged value and eternally the 
same meaning. As hundreds of different languages correspond to the 
typically fixed requirements of men, so that one who understood these re¬ 
quirements could learn nothing new from all those languages: so the 
superhistorical thinker illuminates all history of peoples and individuals 
from within, clairvoyantly guesses the original significance of the different 
hieroglyphs and gradually even evades, as one fatigued, the incessant flow 
of new script: how could he fail, amid the endless superfluity of events, to 
take in his fill, more than his fill, and finally be nauseated! So that in the 
end the boldest is perhaps prepared to say to his heart with Giacomo 
Leopardi: 


Nothing is worth 

One tremor or one beat; the very earth 
Deserves no sigh. Life 

Has shrunk to dregs and rancour; the world is unclean. 

Calm, calm. 6 

But let us leave the superhistorical men their nausea and their wisdom: 
today we want rather to rejoice in our unwisdom from the bottom of our 
hearts and as active and progressive men, as admirers of the process, enjoy 

6. From Leopardi's poem "A se stesso" (To himself) translated by Edwin Morgan. 


14 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


ourselves. May our estimation of the historical be but an occidental pre¬ 
judice; as long as, within these prejudices, we make progress and do not 
stand still! As long as we constantly learn to improve our ability to do 
history for the sake of life. So long as we may always be sure of more life 
than they, we will gladly grant the superhistorical men that they have 
more wisdom: for in this way, at any rate, our unwisdom will have more 
of a future than their wisdom. And so that there may remain no doubt 
about the significance of this opposition between life and wisdom I shall 
call to aid a traditionally well proven procedure and straightway set up 
several theses. 

A historical phenomenon clearly and completely understood and re¬ 
duced to an intellectual phenomenon, is for him who has understood it 
dead: for in it he has understood the mania, the injustice, the blind pas¬ 
sion, and in general the whole earthly darkened horizon of that 
phenomenon, and just in this he has understood its historical power. So 
far as he is a knower this power has now become powerless for him: not 
yet perhaps so far as he is a living being. 

History, conceived as pure science and become sovereign, would con¬ 
stitute a kind of final closing out of the accounts of life for mankind. 
Historical education is wholesome and promising for the future only in the 
service of a powerful new life-giving influence, of a rising culture for ex¬ 
ample; that is, only when it is ruled and guided by a higher power and 
does not itself rule and guide. 

History, so far as it serves life, serves an unhistorical power. While so 
subordinated it will and ought never, therefore, become a pure science 
like, say, mathematics. But the question to what degree life requires the 
service of history at all is one of the highest questions and concerns affect¬ 
ing the health of a man, a people, a culture. For with a certain excess of 
history life crumbles and degenerates, and finally, because of this 
degeneration, history itself degenerates as well. 

2 

That life requires the service of history, however, must be understood 
just as clearly as the proposition we intend to prove later—that an excess 
of history is detrimental to life. History belongs to the living man in three 
respects: it belongs to him so far as he is active and striving, so far as he 
preserves and admires, and so far as he suffers and is in need of liberation. 
To this triplicity of relations correspond three kinds of history: so far as 
they can be distinguished, a monumental an antiquarian and a critical 
kind of history. 

History belongs above all to the active and powerful man, to him who 
fights a great fight, who requires models, teachers and comforters and can¬ 
not find them among his associates and contemporaries. Thus history 


§2 


15 


belonged to Schiller: for our age is so bad, says Goethe, that the poet en¬ 
counters none to inspire him in the life that surrounds him. With respect to 
the man of action Polybius, 7 for example, calls political history the proper 
preparation for governing a state and the great teacher who, by reminding 
us of the sudden misfortunes of others, exhorts us steadfastly to bear the 
reverses of fortune. Whoever has learned to see the meaning of history in 
this must be distressed to see curious tourists or painstaking micrologists 
climbing around on the pyramids of monumental ages; where he has 
found incentive to do as others have done and do it better he does not 
want to meet the idler who, craving for distraction or sensation, strolls 
about as though among the heaped up pictorial treasures of some gallery. 
So as not to despair and be disgusted among frail and hopeless idlers, 
among contemporaries who appear to be active but in fact are merely 
wrought up and fidgetting, the man of action looks back and interrupts 
the course to his goal for once to breathe freely. His goal, however, is 
some happiness, perhaps not his own, often that of a people or of all 
mankind; he flees resignation and uses history as a means against resigna¬ 
tion. In most cases, however, no reward beckons him unless it be fame, 
that is, the expectation of a place of honour in the temple of history where 
he himself may teach, console, and warn those who come after him. For 
his commandment reads: what once was capable of magnifying the con¬ 
cept man' and of giving it a more beautiful content must be present eter¬ 
nally in order eternally to have this capacity. That the great moments in 
the struggle of individuals form a chain, that in them the high points of 
humanity are linked throughout millennia, that what is highest in such a 
moment of the distant past be for me still alive, bright and great—this is 
the fundamental thought of the faith in humanity which is expressed in the 
demand for a monumental history. Precisely this demand however, that 
the great be eternal, occasions the most terrible conflict. For all else which 
also lives cries no. The monumental ought not arise—that is the counter¬ 
watch-word. Dull habit, the small and lowly which fills all corners of the 
world and wafts like a dense earthly vapour around everything great, 
deceiving, smothering and suffocating, obstructs the path which the great 
must still travel to immortality. Yet this path leads through human brains! 
Through the brains of frightened shortlived animals who repeatedly rise to 
the same needs and with effort fend off their destruction for a short time. 
For above all they want one thing: to live at all cost. Who could suspect in 
them the arduous torch race of monumental history through which alone 
the great lives on! And yet time and again some awaken who, in viewing 
past greatness and strengthened by their vision, rejoice as though human 
life were a grand affair and as though it were even the sweetest fruit of this 
bitter growth to know that at some earlier time someone went through ex- 

7. The Histories, trans. W. R. Paton, Harvard University Press and William Heinemann 
Ltd., London, 1967, Vol. I, p. 3. 


16 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


istence proud and strong, another in profound thought, a third helpfully 
and with pity—yet all leaving one lesson, that he lives most splendidly 
who pays no heed to existence. If the common man views this span of time 
with such sad seriousness and finds it so desirable, then these others, on 
their way to immortality and monumental history, knew how to disregard 
it with Olympian laughter or at least with lofty scorn; they often went to 
their graves with irony—for what did they have that could be buried! 
Surely no more than what had always oppressed them as dross, excre¬ 
ment, vanity and animality which will now fall into forgetfulness after it 
had long been given over to their contempt. But one thing will live, the 
monogram of their most authentic essence, a work, a deed, a rare inspira¬ 
tion, a creation: it will live because posterity cannot do without it. In this 
most refined form fame is more than the most delicious morsel of our self- 
love, as Schopenhauer 8 called it; it is the belief in the affinity and continui¬ 
ty of the great of all ages, it is a protest against the change of generations 
and transitoriness. 

What is the advantage to the present individual, then, of the monumen¬ 
tal view of the past, the concern with the classical and the rare of earlier 
times? It is the knowledge that the great which once existed was at least 
possible once and may well again be possible sometime; he goes his way 
more courageously, for now the doubt which assails him in moments of 
weakness, that he may perhaps want the impossible, has been conquered. 
Suppose someone were to believe that it required no more than a hundred 
productive men, raised and active in a new spirit, to put an end to the 
cultural refinement which has just now become fashionable in Germany, 
how it would strengthen him to realize that the culture of the Renaissance 
was raised on the shoulders of such a group of one hundred men. 

And yet—at once to learn another new thing from the same ex¬ 
ample—how flowing and elusive, how imprecise would such a com¬ 
parison be! How much that is different must be overlooked, how ruthless¬ 
ly must the individuality of the past be forced into a general form and have 
all its sharp edges and lines broken for the sake of agreement, if the com¬ 
parison is to have that powerful effect! Fundamentally what was possible 
once could only be possible a second time if the Pythagoreans were right in 
believing that with the same conjunction of the heavenly bodies the same 
events had to be repeated on earth down to the minutest detail: so that 
whenever the stars have a certain relation to each other a Stoic will join 
with an Epicurean and murder Caesar, and ever again with a different con¬ 
figuration Columbus will discover America. Only if the earth again and 
again began her drama anew after the fifth act, if it were certain that the 

8. "Considered eudaemonistically, then, fame is nothing more than the rarest and most 
delicious morsel for our pride and our vanity." Arthur Schopenhauer, Samtliche Werke, ed. 
Wolfgang Freiherr von Lohneisen, Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt, 1968, 
Vol. IV, p. 475. 


§2 


17 


same tangle of motives, the same deus ex machina, the same catastrophe 
recurred at definite intervals, should the powerful man desire monumental 
history in complete pictorial truthfulness , that is, desire each fact in 
its precisely depicted character and uniqueness: thus probably not before 
the astronomers become astrologers again. Until then monumental history 
will not find such complete truthfulness to its advantage: it will always 
approximate, generalize and finally equate differences; it will always 
weaken the disparity of motives and occasions in order, at the expense 
of the cause, to present the effect monumentally, that is, as exemplary 
and worthy of imitation. Monumental history then, since it disregards 
causes as much as possible, could without much exaggeration be called a 
collection of "effects in themselves", or of events which will at all times 
produce an effect. What is celebrated in national festivals and in religious 
or military days of remembrance is actually such an "effect in itself": it is 
this which gives no rest to the ambitious, which the enterprising take to 
heart like an amulet, and not the true, historical nexus of causes and ef¬ 
fects which, if fully understood, would only prove that never again could 
quite the same thing result in the game of dice played by chance and the 
future. 

As long as the soul of historiography is found in the great incentives a 
powerful man receives from it, as long as the past must be described as 
something worthy of imitation, something that can be imitated and is 
possible a second time, so long, at least, is the past in danger of being 
somewhat distorted, of being reinterpreted according to aesthetic criteria 
and so brought closer to fiction; there are even ages which are quite in¬ 
capable of distinguishing between a monumental past and a mythical fic¬ 
tion: for precisely the same incentives can be given by the one world as by 
the other. Thus, whenever the monumental vision of the past rules over 
the other ways of looking at the past, I mean the antiquarian and the 
critical, the past itself suffers damage : very great portions of the past are 
forgotten and despised, and flow away like a grey uninterrupted flood, 
and only single embellished facts stand out as islands: there seems to be 
something unnatural and wondrous about the rare persons who become 
visible at all, like the golden hip which the pupils of Pythagoras thought 
they discerned in their master. Monumental history deceives with 
analogies: with tempting similarities the courageous are enticed to 
rashness, the enthusiastic to fanaticism; and if one thinks of this history as 
being in the hands and heads of talented egoists and enraptured rascals 
then empires are destroyed, princes murdered, wars and revolutions in¬ 
stigated and the number of historical "effects in themselves," that is, of ef¬ 
fects without sufficient causes, is further increased. So much as a reminder 
of the damage which monumental history can cause among the mighty 
and active, be they good or evil: but what can it not inflict if the impotent 
and inactive master it and put it to their uses! 


18 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


Let us take the simplest and most frequent example. Think of artless and 
feebly artistic natures girded and armed by monumental history of art and 
artists: against whom will they now direct their weapons? Against their 
traditional enemies, the strong artistic spirits, namely against those who 
alone are capable of learning truly, that is, for the sake of life, from that 
history and of putting what they have learned into higher practice. It is 
their path which is obstructed and their air which is darkened when one 
dances idolatrously and diligently round a half understood monument of 
some great past, as though to say: "See, this is true and real art: what do 
you care about aspiring newcomers!" Apparently this dancing swarm even 
has a monopoly on "good taste": for the creator has always been at a 
disadvantage to him who only looked on without even trying his hand; as 
at all times the armchair politician has been wiser, more just and judicious 
than the governing statesman. If, however, the use of the popular vote and 
numerical majorities were transferred to the realm of art and the artist re¬ 
quired to defend himself before a forum of the aesthetically inactive, you 
may bet your life that he would be condemned: not despite, but just 
because of the fact that his judges have solemnly proclaimed the canon of 
monumental art (that is, according to the given explanation, of art which 
has at all times "produced an effect"). While for all art which is not yet 
monumental because still contemporary they lack first, any need, second, 
any genuine inclination, third, just that authority of history. On the other 
hand their instinct tells them that art may be beaten to death with art: the 
monumental must definitely not be produced again, and what happens to 
have the authority of monumentality from the past is just the right preven¬ 
tative. This is how the connoisseurs are because they wish to eliminate art 
altogether; they give the appearance of physicians while their real inten¬ 
tion is to dispense poisons; so they cultivate their tongue and their taste in 
order to explain fastidiously why they so insistently decline whatever 
nourishing artistic fare is offered them. For they do not want something 
great to be produced: their expedient is to say "see, the great already ex¬ 
ists!" In truth they care as little about existing greatness as about greatness 
in the making: to that their life bears witness. Monumental history is the 
disguise in which their hatred of the mighty and the great of their time 
parades as satisfied admiration of the mighty and the great of past ages. 
Cloaked in this disguise they turn the proper sense of monumental history 
into its opposite; whether they know it clearly or not, at any rate they act 
as though their motto were: let the dead bury the living. 

Each of the three kinds of history is justified in only one soil and one 
climate: in every other it grows into a noxious weed. If the man who wants 
to achieve something great needs the past at all he will master it through 
monumental history; who on the other hand likes to persist in the tradi¬ 
tional and venerable will care for the past as an antiquarian historian; and 
only he who is oppressed by some present misery and wants to throw off 


§3 


19 


the burden at all cost has a need for critical, that is judging and condemning 
history. Much harm is caused by thoughtless transplanting: the critic without 
need, the antiquarian without reverence, the connoisseur of the great who has 
not the ability to achieve the great are such growths which have been alien¬ 
ated from their native soil and therefore have degenerated and shot up as weeds. 

3 

In the second place, then, history belongs to the preserving and revering 
soul—to him who with loyalty and love looks back on his origins; through 
this reverence he, as it were, gives thanks for his existence. By tending 
with loving hands what has long survived he intends to preserve the condi¬ 
tions in which he grew up for those who will come after him—and so he 
serves life. The possession of ancestral furniture changes its meaning in 
such a soul: for the soul is rather possessed by the furniture. The small and 
limited, the decayed and obsolete receives its dignity and inviolability in 
that the preserving and revering soul of the antiquarian moves into these 
things and makes itself at home in the nest it builds there. The history of 
his city becomes for him the history of his self; he understands the wall, 
the turreted gate, the ordinance of the town council, the national festival 
like an illustrated diary of his youth and finds himself, his strength, his 
diligence, his pleasure, his judgment, his folly and rudeness, in all of them. 
Here one could live, he says to himself, for here one can live and will be 
able to live, for we are tough and not to be uprooted over night. And so, 
with this "We", he looks beyond the ephemeral, curious, individual life 
and feels like the spirit of the house, the generation, and the city. Occa¬ 
sionally he will greet the soul of his people as his own soul even across the 
wide, obscuring and confusing centuries; and power of empathy and 
divination, of scenting an almost cold trail, of instinctively reading aright 
the past however much it be written over, a quick understanding of the 
palimpsests, even polypsests—these are his gifts and virtues. With them 
Goethe stood before the memorial of Erwin von Steinbach; in the tempest 
of his emotions the historical cloudcover spread between them tore, and 
for the first time he saw the German work again "exerting its influence out 
of a strong robust German soul". 9 Such a sense and disposition guided the 
Italians of the Renaissance and reawakened in their poets the ancient Italic 
genius to a "wondrous reverberation of the ancient lyre", 10 as Jakob 
Burckhardt puts it. But this antiquarian historical sense of reverence is of 
highest value where it imbues modest, coarse, even wretched conditions in 

9. The reference is to Goethe's essay "Von deutscher Baukunst" which is dedicated to the 
departed spirit (divis manibus) of Erwin von Steinbach. The quotation is found near the end 
of this short essay. 

10. Jacob Burckhardt, Die Cultur der Renaissance in Italien , 4th edition, Leipzig, 1885, 
Vol. I, p. 286. 


20 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


which a man or a people live with a simple touching feeling of pleasure 
and contentment; as for example Niebuhr honestly and candidly admits to 
living cheerfully on moor and heath among free peasants who have a 
history, without ever missing art. How could history serve life better than 
by tying even less favoured generations and populations to their homeland 
and its customs, by making them sedentary and preventing their searching 
and contentiously fighting for something better in foreign lands? At times 
what, as it were, nails an individual down to these companions and en¬ 
vironment, to this tiresome habit, to this bare mountaintop seems to be 
stubbornness and unreason—but it is a most wholesome unreason produc¬ 
tive of the common goal: as everyone knows who is aware of the terrible 
consequences of an adventurous urge to emigrate, say, in whole hordes of 
populations, or who closely observes the condition of a people which has 
lost its loyalty to its earlier times and is given over to a restless 
cosmopolitan choosing and searching for novelty and ever more novelty. 
The opposite sentiment, the contentment of a tree with its roots, the hap¬ 
piness of knowing oneself not to be wholly arbitrary and accidental, but 
rather as growing out of a past as its heir, flower and fruit and so to be ex¬ 
culpated, even justified, in one's existence—this is what one now especial¬ 
ly likes to call the proper historical sense. 

These, of course, are not the conditions which most favour a man's abili¬ 
ty to reduce the past to pure knowledge; and we see again here what we have 
seen in the case of monumental history, that the past itself suffers as long as 
history serves life and is ruled by the impulses of life. To use a somewhat 
stretched metaphor: the tree feels its roots more than it can see them; this 
feeling, however, measures their size by the size and strength of its visible 
branches. The tree may already be in error here: but how much greater will 
its error be about the whole forest which surrounds it! of which it only 
knows and feels anything so far as it is hindered or helped by it—but 
nothing beyond that. The antiquarian sense of a man, of an urban commu¬ 
nity, of a whole people always has an extremely limited field of vision; by 
far the most is not seen at all, and the little that is seen is seen too closely and 
in isolation; it cannot apply a standard and therefore takes everything to be 
equally important and therefore each individual thing to be too important. 
Under these circumstances there are no differences in value and no propor¬ 
tions for the things of the past which would truly do justice to those things in 
relation to each other; but only measures and proportions of those things in 
relation to the antiquarian individual or people looking back at them. 

Here there is always one danger very near: the time will finally come 
when everything old and past which has not totally been lost sight of will 
simply be taken as equally venerable, while whatever does not approach 
the old with veneration, that is, the new and growing, will be rejected and 
treated with hostility. Thus even the Greeks tolerated the hieratic style of 


§3 


21 


their plastic arts beside a freer and greater style; and later not only 
tolerated the pointed noses and frosty smiles but even made of them a mat¬ 
ter of refinement in artistic taste. When the sense of a people hardens in 
this way, when history serves past life so as to undermine further and 
especially higher life, when the historical sense no longer preserves life but 
mummifies it: then the tree dies unnaturally, beginning at the top and 
slowly dying toward the roots—and in the end the root itself generally 
decays. Antiquarian history itself degenerates the moment that the fresh 
life of the present no longer animates and inspires it. Now piety withers 
away, scholarly habit endures without it and, egoistically complacent, 
revolves around its own centre. Then you may well witness the repugnant 
spectacle of a blind lust for collecting, of a restless raking together of all 
that once has been. Man envelops himself in an odour of decay; through 
his antiquarian habit he succeeds in degrading even a more significant 
talent and nobler need to an insatiable craving for novelty, or rather a 
craving for all things and old things; often he sinks so low as finally to be 
satisfied with any fare and devours with pleasure even the dust of 
bibliographical quisquilia. 

But even if that degeneration does not come about, if antiquarian history 
does not lose the foundation in which alone it can take root for the benefit 
of life: there are always left dangers enough should it become too powerful 
and overgrow the other ways of seeing the past. It merely understands how 
to preserve life, not how to generate it; therefore it always underestimates 
what is in process of becoming because it has no instinct for discerning its 
significance—unlike monumental history, for example, which has this in¬ 
stinct. Thus it hinders the powerful resolve for new life, thus it paralyzes 
the man of action who, as man of action, will and must always injure some 
piety or other. The fact that something has become old now gives rise to the 
demand that it must be immortal; for if one calculates what such an ancient 
thing—an old ancestral custom, a religious faith, an inherited political 
privilege—has experienced during its existence, the amount of piety and 
veneration paid by individuals and generations: then it seems presump¬ 
tuous or even impious to replace such an ancient thing with a new one and 
to compare such a vast sum of acts of piety and veneration with the single¬ 
digit numbers of what is becoming and present. 

Here it becomes clear how badly man needs, often enough, in addition 
to the monumental and antiquarian ways of seeing the past, a third kind, 
the critical: and this again in the service of life as well. He must have the 
strength, and use it from time to time, to shatter and dissolve something to 
enable him to live: this he achieves by dragging it to the bar of judgment, 
interrogating it meticulously and finally condemning it; every past, how¬ 
ever, is worth condemning—for that is how matters happen to stand with 
human affairs: human violence and weakness have always contributed 


22 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


strongly to shaping them. It is not justice which here sits in judgment; even 
less is it mercy which here pronounces judgment: but life alone, that dark, 
driving, insatiably self-desiring power. Its verdict is always unmerciful, 
always unjust, because it has never flowed from a pure fountain of 
knowledge; but in most cases the verdict would be the same were justice 
itself to proclaim it. For 'whatever has a beginning deserves to have an un¬ 
doing; it would be better if nothing began at all." 11 It takes a great deal of 
strength to be able to live and to forget how far living and being unjust are 
one. Luther himself once thought that the world came to be through an 
oversight of God: for had God thought of "heavy artillery" he would 
never have created the world. Occasionally, however, the same life which 
needs forgetfulness demands the temporary destruction of this forget¬ 
fulness; then it is to become clear how unjust is the existence of some 
thing, a privilege, a caste, a dynasty for example, how much this thing 
deserves destruction. Then its past is considered critically, then one puts 
the knife to its roots, then one cruelly treads all pieties under foot. It is 
always a dangerous process, namely dangerous for life itself: and men or 
ages which serve life in this manner of judging and annihilating a past are 
always dangerous and endangered men and ages. For since we happen to 
be the results of earlier generations we are also the results of their aberra¬ 
tions, passions and errors, even crimes; it is not possible quite to free 
oneself from this chain. If we condemn those aberrations and think our¬ 
selves quite exempt from them, the fact that we are descended from them 
is not eliminated. At best we may bring about a conflict between our in¬ 
herited, innate nature and our knowledge, as well as a battle between a 
strict new discipline and ancient education and breeding; we implant a 
new habit, a new instinct, a second nature so that the first nature withers 
away. It is an attempt, as it were, a posteriori to give oneself a past from 
which one would like to be descended in opposition to the past from which 
one is descended :—always a dangerous attempt because it is so difficult to 
find a limit in denying the past and because second natures are mostly 
feebler than the first. Too often we stop at knowing the good without do¬ 
ing it because we also know the better without being able to do it. Yet here 
and there a victory is achieved nevertheless, and for the fighters who use 
critical history for life there is even a remarkable consolation: namely, to 
know that this first nature also was, at some time or other, a second nature 
and that every victorious second nature becomes a first. 

4 

These are the services which history is capable of rendering to life; each 

11. J. W. von Goethe, Faust, Part I. The lines are spoken by Mephistopheles in the early 
scene in Faust's study. We quote the translation by Louis MacNeice and E. L. Stahl. 


§4 


23 


man and each people requires, according to their goals, strengths and 
needs, a certain knowledge of the past, sometimes as monumental, 
sometimes as antiquarian, sometimes as critical history: but not like a 
crowd of pure thinkers who only contemplate life, not like individuals, 
hungry for knowledge, satisfied with mere knowledge, whose only goal is 
the increase of knowledge, but always only for the purpose of life and 
therefore also always under the rule and highest direction of that purpose. 
That this is the natural relation of an age, a culture, a people to 
history—brought on by hunger, regulated by the degree of need, held 
within limits by the inherent plastic power—that knowledge of the past is 
at all times desired only in the service of the future and the present, not to 
weaken the present, not to uproot a future strong with life: all of this is 
simple, as truth is simple, and immediately convinces even him who has 
not first been given a historical proof. 

And now a quick glance at our time! We are shocked, we fly back: 
whither is all clarity, all naturalness and purity of that relation between 
life and history, how confused, how exaggerated, how troubled is this 
problem which now surges before our eyes! Is the fault ours, the 
observers? Or has the constellation of life and history really changed 
because a powerful, hostile star has come between them? May others show 
that we have seen falsely: we will say what we believe we see. Such a star 
has indeed intervened, a bright and glorious star, the constellation is really 
changed— through science , through the demand that history be a science. 
Now life is no longer the sole ruler and master of knowledge of the past: 
rather all boundary markers are overthrown and everything which once 
was rushes in upon man. All perspectives have shifted as far back as the 
origins of change, back into infinity. A boundless spectacle such as 
history, the science of universal becoming, now displays, no generation 
has ever seen; of course, she displays it with the dangerous boldness of her 
motto: fiat veritas pereat vita. 12 

Let us now picture to ourselves the spiritual events brought on hereby 
in the soul of modern man. Historical knowledge floods in ever anew 
from inexhaustible springs, the alien and disconnected throngs about, 
memory opens all its gates and is still not opened wide enough, nature 
makes a supreme effort to receive these alien guests, to order and to 
honour them, but these themselves are at war with each other and it 
appears necessary to master and overcome them all so as not oneself to 
perish in their strife. Gradually it becomes second nature to get accus¬ 
tomed to such a disorderly, stormy, belligerent household, while at the 
same time it is beyond question that this second nature is much weaker, 
much more troubled and through and through less healthy than the first. 

12. Let there be truth, and may life perish. 


24 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


In the end modern man drags an immense amount of indigestible knowl¬ 
edge stones around with him which on occasion rattle around in his belly, 
as the fairy tale 13 has it. This rattling betrays the most distinctive prop¬ 
erty of this modern man: the remarkable opposition of an inside to which 
no outside and an outside to which no inside corresponds, an opposition 
unknown to ancient peoples. Knowledge, taken in excess without hunger, 
even contrary to need, no longer acts as a transforming motive impelling 
to action and remains hidden in a certain chaotic inner world which that 
modern man, with curious pride, calls his unique "inwardness". He may 
then say that he has the content and that only the form is lacking; but in 
all living things this is quite an unseemly opposition. Our modern culture 
is nothing living just because it cannot be understood at all without that 
opposition, that is: it is no real culture at all, but only a kind of knowl¬ 
edge about culture, it stops at cultured thoughts and cultured feelings but 
leads to no cultured decisions. That, however, which truly is a motive 
and visibly shows itself in action often signifies little more than an indif¬ 
ferent convention, a miserable imitation or even a rude grimace. In the 
inner being sentiment may well sleep like the snake which, having swal¬ 
lowed whole rabbits, calmly lies in the sun and avoids all movement 
except the most necessary. The inner process, that is now the thing itself, 
that is properly "culture". Everyone who passes by wishes only one thing, 
that such a culture not perish of indigestibility. Think, for example, of a 
Greek passing by such a culture, he would perceive that for more recent 
men 'educated' and 'historically educated' appear to belong together as 
though they were one and distinguished only by the number of words. 
Were he now to give voice to his tenet: a man can be very educated and 
yet be historically quite uneducated, one would believe not to have heard 
properly and shake one's head. That well known little people of a not too 
distant past, I mean just the Greeks, had stubbornly preserved its unhis- 
torical sense in the period of its greatest strength; were a contemporary 
man forced by magic spells to return to that world he would presumably 
find the Greeks very "uneducated", which would, of course, disclose the 
meticulously disguised secret of modern culture to public laughter: for 
from ourselves we moderns have nothing at all; only by filling and over¬ 
filling ourselves with alien ages, customs, arts, philosophies, religions and 
knowledge do we become something worthy of notice, namely walking 
encyclopedias, as which an ancient Hellene, who had been thrown into 
our age, might perhaps address us. The whole value of encyclopedias, 
however, is found only in what is written in them, the content, not in 
what is written on them or in what is cover and what is shell; and so the 
whole of modern culture is essentially internal: on the outside the book¬ 
binder has printed something like "Handbook of Inner Culture for Exter- 


13. Little Red Riding Hood 


§4 


25 


nal Barbarians". This opposition of inside and outside makes the outside 
still more barbaric than it would need to be were a rude people to grow 
out of itself alone according to its rough requirements. For what means is 
left to nature to take in what imposes itself so excessively? Only the one 
means, to accept it as easily as possible in order quickly to lay it aside 
again and expel it. This gives rise to a habit of not taking actual things 
too seriously anymore, this gives rise to the "weak personality" as a result 
of which the actual and enduring make only a minimal impression; in 
externals one finally becomes ever more casual and indolent and widens 
the critical gulf between content and form to the point of insensitivity to 
barbarism, if only the memory is stimulated ever anew, if only ever new 
things to be known keep streaming in to be neatly put on display in the 
cases of that memory. The culture of a people in contrast to that barba¬ 
rism has once been designated, with some justification I believe, as unity 
of artistic style in all expressions of life of a people ; 14 this designation 
should not be misunderstood as though the opposition between barba¬ 
rism and beautiful style were at issue; the people that can be called cul¬ 
tured must in reality be a living unity and not fall apart so miserably into 
an inside and an outside, a content and a form. If you want to strive for 
and promote the culture of a people, then strive for and promote this 
higher unity and work to annihilate modern pseudo-culture in favour of a 
true culture; dare to devote some thought to the problem of restoring the 
health of a people which has been impaired by history, to how it may 
recover its instincts and therewith its integrity. 

I wish only to speak plainly of us Germans of the present, of us who 
suffer more than another people from that weakness of personality and 
the contradiction of content and form. Form is for us Germans generally 
a convention, a costume and disguise, and for that reason it is, if not 
hated, at least not loved; it would be more correct still to say that we are 
extraordinarily afraid of the word 'convention', and surely also of the 
thing 'convention'. With this fear the German left the school of the 
French: for he wanted to become more natural and thereby more Ger¬ 
man. However, he seems to have miscalculated this 'thereby': having run 
away from the school of convention he let himself go as and where it 
pleased him, and basically imitated sloppily and arbitrarily in partial 
forgetfulness what earlier he imitated meticulously and often successfully. 
Even today we still live, compared with earlier times, by slovenly, incor¬ 
rect French convention: as all our walking, standing, conversation, dress 
and home life shows. We thought we had come back to being natural; but 
we merely chose to let ourselves go, we chose indolent comfort and the 
smallest possible degree of self-control. Walk around any German 
city—all convention, compared with the national character of foreign 


14. This probably refers to the first of Nietzsche's Untimely Observations, David Straup. 


26 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


cities, will prove to be negative, all is colourless, worn down, badly 
copied, careless, each man follows his fancy, but not a strong thoughtful 
fancy, rather according to laws prescribed at one time by general haste 
and at another by the general craving for comfort. A piece of clothing 
whose invention requires no great mental effort, which takes no time to 
put on, that is, a piece of clothing borrowed from foreigners and copied 
as carelessly as possible, counts with Germans at once as a contribution 
to German fashion. The sense of form is rejected by them with veritable 
irony—one has, after all, the sense of content: they are, after all, the 
famous people of inwardness. 

There is, however, a famous danger in this inwardness: the content 
itself, of which it is assumed that it cannot be seen at all from the out¬ 
side, may at some time or other evaporate; externally one would not 
detect a trace of this nor of its earlier presence. But however far one may 
believe the German people to be from this danger: the foreigner will 
never be quite wrong in his reproach that our inner being is too weak 
and disorderly to have an external effect and give itself a form. Yet it 
may prove to be delicately receptive to a rare degree, serious, powerful, 
fervent, good and perhaps even richer than the inner being of other 
peoples: but as a whole it remains weak, since all those beautiful fibres 
are not entwined into a strong knot: so that the visible deed is not the 
deed of the whole and a self-manifestation of this inner being, but only a 
feeble and rude attempt of some fibre or other wanting for the sake 
of appearance to count as the whole. Therefore the German cannot be 
judged at all by an action and remains hidden as an individual even after 
this deed. He must, as is well known, be measured by his thoughts and 
his feelings and these he now expresses in his books. If only it were not 
just these books which lately raise more than a doubt, whether this 
famous inwardness still sits in its inaccessible little temple: it would be 
terrible to think that it disappeared one day and all that now remains as 
the distinguishing mark of the German is his outer being, that arrogantly 
clumsy and meekly ineffectual outer being. It would be almost as terrible 
as if that inwardness were to sit in there hidden from view, a counterfeit 
rouged and painted, having become an actress if not something worse: as 
for example Grillparzer, standing aside and calmly observing, seems to 
have come to believe through his dramatic-theatrical experience. "We 
feel with abstraction", he says, "we hardly know any longer how feeling 
is expressed by our contemporaries; we portray expressions of feeling 
which no longer occur nowadays. Shakespeare has spoiled all of us 
moderns ." 15 

This is a single case perhaps too quickly interpreted as holding general- 

15. Grillparzer F., Werke, Der Tempel-Verlag, Berlin and Darmstadt, 1965, Vol. II, pp. 
285-6. 


§4 


27 


ly: but how terrible would be its justified generalization, if all too many 
single cases imposed themselves on the observer, what despair would ring 
in this proposition: we Germans feel with abstraction; we have all been 
spoiled by history—a proposition which would destroy at its roots all 
hope of a national culture still to come: for every hope of this kind is 
nourished by the belief in the genuineness and immediacy of German feel¬ 
ing, by the belief in an unharmed inwardness. What is there still to be 
hoped and believed when the spring of belief and hope is muddied, when 
inwardness has learned to leap, to dance, to use make-up, to express itself 
with abstraction and calculation and gradually to lose itself! And how 
shall the great productive spirit still find it tolerable to remain with a peo¬ 
ple which is no longer sure of its unifying inwardness and which falls apart 
into the educated with a miseducated and misguided inwardness and the 
uneducated with an inaccessible inwardness. How can this spirit tolerate it 
if the integrity of a peoples feeling is lost, if moreover he finds this feeling 
a rouged counterfeit in just that part which calls itself the educated part of 
the people and claims a right to the national artistic spirits. Even if here 
and there the judgment and taste of individuals had grown finer and more 
refined—that does not compensate this spirit; he is tormented by having to 
speak only to a sect, as it were, and no longer being necessary in the midst 
of his people. Perhaps he would rather bury his treasure now because he 
feels revulsion at being pretentiously patronized by a sect while his heart is 
filled with pity for all. The instinct of the people no longer goes out to him; 
it is useless to long for him with open arms. What else is left to him but to 
.urn his inspired hatred towards that hindering constraint, against the bar¬ 
riers erected by the so-called education of his people, to condemn as judge 
what for him who lives and generates life is annihilation and degradation: 
so he exchanges the deep insight of his fate for the divine pleasure of 
creating and helping and ends in lonely knowledge as a surfeited sage. It is 
the most painful spectacle: whoever sees it at all will discern a holy de¬ 
mand here: he says to himself, one must help here, that higher unity in the 
nature and soul of a people must be remade, that break between the inside 
and the outside must disappear under the hammer blows of need. What 
means shall he use? What is now left him but his deep knowledge: in ex¬ 
pressing it, disseminating it, distributing it generously he hopes to plant a 
need: and from this strong need a strong deed will one day arise. And so as 
to leave no doubt from where I take the example of that need, that want, 
that knowledge: I shall explicitly set down my testimony here that it is 
German unity in that highest sense for which we strive and strive for more 
ardently than political reunification, the unity of the German spirit and 
life after the annihilation of the opposition of form and content, of in¬ 
wardness and convention. 


28 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


5 

The surfeit of history of an age seems to me hostile and dangerous to life 
in five respects: through such an excess the contrast of inside and outside, 
discussed above, is generated and the personality weakened thereby; 
through this excess an age comes to imagine that it possesses the rarest vir¬ 
tue, justice, to a higher degree than any other age; through this excess the 
instincts of a people are impaired and the maturing of the individual no 
less than of the whole is prevented; through this excess the belief, harmful 
at any time, in the old age of mankind is implanted, the belief of being a 
latecomer and epigone; through this excess an age acquires the dangerous 
disposition of irony with regard to itself, and from this the still more 
dangerous one of cynicism: in this, however, it ripens even more into 
clever egoistic practice through which the vital strength is paralized and 
finally destroyed. 

And now back to our first proposition: modern man suffers from a 
weakened personality. As the Roman of the Empire ceased to be Roman 
with regard to the region of the world which was at his service, as he lost 
himself in the influx of the foreign and degenerated in the cosmopolitan 
carnival of gods, customs, and arts, so it must go with modern man who 
continuously has the feast of a world exhibition prepared for him by his 
historical artists; he has become a spectator merely enjoying himself and 
strolling around and brought to a condition which can hardly be altered 
for a moment even by great wars and great revolutions. The war is not yet 
over and already it has been transformed a hundred thousandfold into 
printed paper, already it is being served up as a new stimulant for the 
weary palates of those greedy for history. It appears almost impossible to 
elicit a strong full sound even with the mightiest sweep of the strings: it 
fades away immediately, and in the next moment it already echoes away 
strengthless in historically subdued vapours. In moral language: you no 
longer succeed in holding fast the sublime, your deeds are sudden claps, 
not rolling thunder. Achieve the greatest and most wonderful: it must 
nevertheless go to Orcus unsung. For art flees if you immediately spread 
the historical awning over your deeds. Whoever wants to understand, 
calculate, comprehend in a moment where with profoundly sustained 
emotion he ought to hold fast the unintelligible as the sublime, may be 
called rational, but only in the sense in which Schiller speaks of the reason 
of reasonable men: he fails to see something which is yet seen by the child, 
he fails to hear something which is yet heard by the child; this something is 
exactly the most important: because he does not understand this his under¬ 
standing is more childish than the child and simpler than simplicity— 
despite the many clever wrinkles on his parchment face and the masterly 
skill his fingers have in unraveling tangles. It comes to this: he has an¬ 
nihilated and lost his instinct; when his reason wavers and his way leads 


§5 


29 


through deserts he can no longer let go the reins and trust in the "divine 
animal". So the individual becomes timid and unsure and may no longer 
believe in himself: he sinks into himself, into his inner being, which here 
only means: into the heaped up chaos of knowledge which fails to have an 
external effect, of teaching which does not become life. If we regard their 
outside we notice how the expulsion of the instincts by history has almost 
transformed men into downright abstracts and shadows: no one dares to 
show his person, but masks himself as an educated man, as a scholar, a 
poet, a politician. If one takes hold of such masks believing them to be real 
and not just a puppet show—for they all pretend to be real—one suddenly 
has hold of nothing but rags and multi-coloured patches. Therefore one 
ought no longer to allow oneself to be deceived, therefore one ought to ad¬ 
dress them imperiously: "take off your jackets or be what you seem!" No 
longer shall everyone who is serious by nature become a Don Quixote, for 
they have better things to do than fight with such presumed realities. At 
least each ought to look closely, call his "Halt! Who goes there?" to each 
mask and tear it off. How strange! One should think that history would, 
above all, encourage men to be honest —even if it were to be an honest 
fool; and it has always had this effect, but no longer! Historical education 
and the universal frock of the citizen rule at the same time. While there has 
never been such sonorous talk of the "free personality" one does not even 
see personalities, not to speak of free ones, rather nothing but timidly 
disguised universal men. The individual has withdrawn into his inner be¬ 
ing: externally one discerns nothing of him anymore; whereby one may 
doubt whether there can be any causes without effects. Or is a race of 
eunuchs required to guard the great historical world-harem? Pure objec¬ 
tivity is most becoming in such men, of course. It almost seems as though 
the task were to guard history so that nothing could come of it but stories, 
but by no means history-making events!—to prevent its making per¬ 
sonalities "free", that is, sincere toward themselves, sincere towards 
others, and that in word and deed. Only through this sincerity will the 
distress, the inner misery of modern man reach the light of day and the 
timidly hidden convention and masquerade can then be replaced by art 
and religion as true helpers, together to plant a culture which is adequate 
to true needs and not, like contemporary general education, only teach to 
lie to oneself about these needs and thus to become a walking lie. 

In how unnatural, artificial, in any case unworthy a condition must the 
most sincere of all the sciences, the honest naked goddess philosophy, 
find herself in an age which suffers from general education! In such a 
world of forced external uniformity she remains a learned monologue of 
the lonely walker, the chance prey of the solitary thinker, a hidden pri¬ 
vate secret or harmless gossip of academic old men and children. No one 
may dare to fulfill the law of philosophy in himself, no one lives philo¬ 
sophically, with that simple manful constancy which compelled one of 


30 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


the ancients, wherever he was, whatever he was doing, to behave like a 
Stoic if once he had pledged allegiance to the Stoa. All modern philoso¬ 
phizing is political and official, limited to learned appearance by govern¬ 
ments, churches, academies, customs, and the cowardices of men; it stops 
with the sigh "if only" or with the realization "once upon a time". Philos¬ 
ophy has no rights within historical education if it wants to be more than 
an inwardly restrained knowing without effect; if modern man were only 
courageous and resolute, if only he were not only an inward being even 
in his enmities: he would banish philosophy; but as it is he is satisfied 
with modestly draping her nakedness. One does think, write, print, teach 
philosophically—all of this is more or less permitted; only in action, in 
so-called life all is different: only one thing is permitted here and every¬ 
thing else simply impossible: so historical education wills it. Are these 
still human beings, one then asks oneself, or only machines that think, 
write and talk? 

Goethe once said of Shakespeare: "No one despised the material 
costume more than he; he knows the inner human costume very well, and 
here all are alike. It is said that he portrayed the Romans very well; I do 
not think so, they are all inveterate Englishmen, but, of course, they are 
men, men from top to bottom, and assuredly the Roman toga fits them ." 16 
Now I ask whether it would be at all possible to present our contemporary 
literati, popular men, officials, politicians as Romans; it would be quite 
impossible because they are not men but only incarnate compendia and, as 
it were, concrete abstractions. If they have character and a manner of their 
own, then all this is seated so deeply that it cannot struggle out to the light 
of day at all: if they are men they can be known as such only by one who 
plumbs them deeply. For all others they are something else, not men, not 
gods, not animals, but historically educated patterns, through and 
through formation, image, form without demonstrable content, unfor¬ 
tunately only bad form, and moreover uniform. And so my proposition 
may be taken and understood: only strong personalities can endure 
history ; the weak are completely extinguished by it . The reason is that 
history confuses feeling and sentiment where these are not strong enough 
to make themselves the measure of the past. The man who no longer dares 
to trust himself, but, seeking counsel from history about his feelings, asks 
"how am I to feel here", will, from timidity, gradually become an actor 
and play a role, mostly even many roles and therefore each so badly and 
superficially. Gradually all congruence between the man and his historical 
scope is lost; we see cheeky little fellows treating the Romans as though 
they were their equals: and they dig and burrow in the remains of Greek 


16. J. W. von Goethe, "Shakespeare und kein Ende". The quotation is near the beginning 
of this essay. 


§5 


31 


poets as though even these corpora 17 lay prepared for their dissection and 
were vilia, which their own literary corpora may be. Let us assume a man 
working on Democritis; I always have the question at the tip of my 
tongue: why not Heraclitus? Or Philo? Or Bacon? Or Descartes?—and so 
on at random. And then: just why a philosopher? Why not a poet, an 
orator? And: why especially a Greek, why not an Englishman, a Turk? Is 
not the past large enough to find something that will not make even you 
appear so ridiculously arbitrary? But, as I have said, it is a race of 
eunuchs; one woman is like the next to the eunuch, just a woman, woman 
in itself, the eternally unapproachable—and so it is a matter of indif¬ 
ference what you do as long as history itself is preserved nice and "objec¬ 
tive", namely by those who can never themselves make history. And since 
the eternally feminine will never draw you up to itself , 18 you draw it down 
to you and, as neuters, take history to be a neuter as well. Lest one believe, 
however, that I seriously compare history with the eternal feminine, I shall 
rather clearly state that, on the contrary, I take it to be the eternal 
masculine: only that for those who are "historically educated" through 
and through it cannot matter very much whether it is one or the other: 
after all, they are themselves neither man nor woman, not even her¬ 
maphrodites, but always only neuters, or, to use a more educated expres¬ 
sion, only the eternally objective ones. 

Once personalities are drained, in the manner described, to the point of 
eternal non-subjectivity, or, as one says, objectivity: nothing can affect 
them any longer; should something good and right happen, as deed, as 
poetry, as music: at once those hollowed out by education will look 
beyond the work and inquire after the history of the author. If he has 
already produced several other works, he must at once suffer to have the 
past and projected future direction of his development explained to him, 
at once he is held up beside others for comparison, with regard to the 
choice and treatment of his material he will be dissected, torn apart, 
wisely put back together and on the whole admonished and reprimanded. 
Something most astonishing may happen, the flock of historical neuters is 
always already on the spot, prepared to comprehend the author from 
afar. Momentarily the echo resounds: but always as "criticism", while 
shortly before the critic did not even dream of the possibility of the event. 
Nowhere does it come to have an effect but always only "criticism"; and 
criticism itself again has no effect but only comes to see further criticism. 
In view of this there has come to be general agreement that much criti¬ 
cism is to be seen as an effect and little or none as failure. Basically, how- 

17. There is a play here on the Latin "corpora" (plural of corpus which can mean either a 
body, e.g. of a human being, or a collection of literary works). The point is that these fellows 
dissect the Greek poets as though they were vile and cheap bodies, while only their own 
literary works are vile and cheap. 

18. An allusion to the last two lines of Goethe's Faust , part II. 



32 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


ever, even with such "effect", all remains as it was: for a while one prat- 
ties something new, then again something new, and in the meantime does 
what one has always done. The historical education of our critics does 
not permit any more that there be an effect in the proper sense, namely 
an effect on life and action: on the blackest script they immediately press 
their blotter, on the most graceful drawing they smear their thick brush 
strokes, which are to be seen as corrections: once again it was all over. 
Their critical pen, however, never ceases to flow for they have lost con¬ 
trol over it and are directed by it, instead of directing it. Just in this 
immoderation of their critical effusion, in this lack of self-mastery, in 
what the Romans call impotentia, the weakness of the modern personal¬ 
ity is betrayed. 

6 

But let us leave this weakness be. Rather let us turn to a much praised 
strength of modern man with the question, which to be sure is embar¬ 
rassing, whether he has a right by virtue of his well known historical "ob¬ 
jectivity" to call himself strong, that is, just, and that to a higher degree 
than the man of other times. Is it true that this objectivity has its origin in a 
heightened desire and demand for justice? Or does it, as the effect of quite 
different causes, merely make it seem that justice is the proper cause of this 
effect? Does it perhaps mislead to a prejudice, dangerous because all too 
flattering, about the virtues of modern man?—Socrates took it to be a 
malady approaching insanity to imagine that one possesses a virtue when 
one does not possess it: and certainly such imagination is more dangerous 
than the opposite delusion of suffering from a shortcoming, from a vice. 
For through this delusion it is perhaps still possible to become better; the 
former imagination, however, will daily make a man or an age worse, that 
is—in this case, more unjust. 

Truly, no one has more of a right to our respect than he who possesses 
the drive and strength to justice. For in it are joined and hidden the highest 
and rarest virtues as in an unfathomable sea which receives and swallows 
up rivers from all sides. The hand of the just man who is competent to sit 
in judgment no longer trembles when it holds the scales; pitiless toward 
himself he places weight upon weight, he is not downcast when the scales 
rise or fall and his voice is neither harsh nor broken when he proclaims the 
verdict. Were he a cold demon of knowledge he would spread about 
himself an icy atmosphere of superhumanly terrible majesty which we 
would have to fear, not revere: but that he is a man and attempts to rise 
from trivial doubt to strict certainty, from tolerant mildness to the im¬ 
perative you must', from the rare virtue of generosity to the rarest of 
justice, that he now resembles that demon without from the beginning be¬ 
ing anything other than a poor man, and above all that at every moment 
he must in himself do penance for his humanity and tragically devours 


§6 


33 


himself through his impossible virtue—all this places him upon a solitary 
height as the most venerable exemplar of the species man; for he wants 
truth but not only as cold knowledge without consequences, rather as 
ordering and punishing judge, truth not as the egoistic possession of the in¬ 
dividual but as the sacred justification to shift all boundary markers of 
egoistic possessions, in a word, truth as the Last Judgment and certainly 
not as the chance prey and pleasure of the individual hunter. Only so far 
as the seeker after truth has the unconditional will to be just is there 
something great in the striving for truth which is everywhere glorified so 
thoughtlessly: while before the duller eye quite a number of the most 
diverse drives such as curiosity, flight from boredom, envy, vanity, play 
instinct—drives which have nothing at all to do with truth—merge with 
that striving for truth which has its root in justice. The world may appear 
full of those who "serve truth"; and yet the virtue of justice is found so 
rarely, more rarely yet is it recognized and almost always mortally hated: 
whereas the host of sham virtues has at all times paraded in honour and 
pomp. Few serve truth in truth because only few have the pure will to be 
just, and of those again very few have the strength to be just. It is not at all 
sufficient to have only the will to justice: and the most terrible sufferings 
have come upon man precisely from a drive to justice which lacks power 
of judgment; which is why the general welfare would require no more than 
to strew the seed of the power of judgment as widely as possible so that the 
fanatic remain distinct from the judge, the blind desire to be a judge 
distinct from the conscious power of being allowed to judge. But where is 
there a means of planting the power of judgment!—that is why men, 
whenever one speaks to them of truth and justice, will forever tarry in 
hesitant indecision whether the fanatic or the judge speaks to them. One 
ought therefore forgive them if they have always greeted with particular 
good will those "servants of truth" who have neither the will nor the 
power to judge and set themselves the task of seeking "pure" knowledge 
"without consequences" or, more plainly, truth that comes to nothing. 
There are very many indifferent truths; there are problems about which to 
judge correctly requires not even effort, to say nothing of sacrifice. A man 
may well succeed in becoming a cold demon of knowledge in this indif¬ 
ferent harmless area; and nevertheless! Even if in particularly favoured 
times whole cohorts of scholars and researchers are transformed into such 
demons—regrettably it still remains possible that such a time suffers from 
deficiency in strict and great justice—in short, in the noblest core of the so- 
called impulse to truth. 

Consider now the historical virtuoso of the present time: is he the justest 
man of his age? It is true, he has developed in himself such a delicate and 
sensitive sensibility that nothing human remains alien to him; the most 
diverse ages and persons immediately reverberate in familiar sounds on his 
lyre: he has become a reverberating passivity which with its sounds acts 




34 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 

again on other such passivities: until finally the whole atmosphere of an 
age is filled with a buzzing confusion of such tender and familiar 
reverberations. Yet it seems to me that one perceives, as it were, only the 
overtones of every original historical key-note: what was robust and 
powerful in the original can no longer be guessed in the ethereally thin and 
pointed sound of those strings. Moreover, the original note usually woke 
deeds, needs, terror, this one lulls us to sleep and turns us into soft men of 
pleasure; it is as though the heroic symphony 19 had been arranged for two 
flutes and reserved for the use of dreamy opium smokers. From this one 
may already gauge how matters will stand with these virtuosos as regards 
the chief claim of modern man to higher and purer justice; this virtue 
never has anything appealing about it, knows no exciting rush of emotion, 
is hard and terrible. Measured by it how low in the ranks of virtues is even 
generosity, that quality of a few rare historians! But a great many more 
only get as far as tolerance, as far as letting stand what simply cannot be 
denied, as far as ordering and beautifying with measured benevolence, on 
the clever assumption that the inexperienced will interpret it as the virtue 
of justice when the past is recounted without any harsh accents and 
without the expression of hatred. But only superior power can judge and 
weakness must tolerate if it would not feign strength and make an actress 
of justice on her seat of judgment. Yet there is still left over one dreadful 
species of historian, of diligent, strict and honest character—but narrow¬ 
minded; here the good will to be just is present, as well as the pathos of 
judging: but all verdicts are false for approximately the same reason that 
the judgments of the usual juries are false. How unlikely, then, is the fre¬ 
quency of historical talent! Leaving quite out of account disguised egoists 
and partisans who play their evil game with quite an objective bearing. 
Also leaving out of account those quite unreflective people who, as 
historians, write in the naive belief that just their age is right in all its 
popular opinions and that to write in accordance with the times comes to 
the same thing as being just; a belief in which every religion lives and con¬ 
cerning which, in a religious context, nothing further is to be said. Those 
naive historians call measuring past opinions and deeds by the common 
opinions of the moment "objectivity": here they find the canon of all 
truths; their work is to make the past fit the triviality of their time. On the 
other hand they call "subjective" all historical writing which does not take 
those popular opinions as its canon. 

And might not an illusion lurk even in the highest interpretation of the 
word objectivity'? By this word one understands a condition in the 
historian in which his view of an event with all of its motives and conse¬ 
quences is so pure that it has no effect at all on his subjectivity: one has in 
mind that aesthetic phenomenon, that detachment from all personal in- 


19. Beethoven's third symphony, the Eroica, is meant. 


§6 


35 


terest with which the painter sees his inner picture in a stormy landscape 
amid lightning and thunder or on a rough sea, one has in mind the total 
absorption in things: yet it is a superstition to believe that the picture 
which things produce in a man in such a state of mind reproduces the em¬ 
pirical essence of those things. Or is one to think that things in such 
moments, as it were, retrace, counterfeit, reproduce themselves photo¬ 
graphically on a pure passivity through their own activity? 

That would be a mythology and a bad one to boot: besides one forgets 
that that moment is just the most powerful and spontaneous moment of 
creation in the inner being of the artist, a moment of composition of the 
highest possible kind whose result may well be an artistically true portrait 
but not an historically true one. To think history objectively in this man¬ 
ner is the silent work of the dramatist; that is, to think everything in con¬ 
junction, to weave a whole out of the isolated: everywhere with the pre¬ 
supposition that a unity of plan must be put into things if it is not there. So 
man spins his web over the past and subdues it, so his impulse to art ex¬ 
presses itself—but not his impulse to truth and justice. Objectivity and 
justice have nothing to do with each other. One could think of a kind of 
historical writing which would not contain a drop of common empirical 
truth and yet be entitled in the highest degree to the predicate 'objectivity'. 
Grillparzer goes so far as to say: "what else is history, after all, than the 
way in which the spirit of man apprehends what for him are impenetrable 
events; unites elements of which God only knows whether they belong 
together; replaces the unintelligible with something intelligible; introduces 
its concepts of externally oriented purpose into a whole which surely ad¬ 
mits only purposes with an inner orientation; and again assumes chance 
where a thousand little causes were at work. Every person at the same time 
has his individual necessity so that millions run in directions parallel to 
each other in crooked and straight lines, cross, support and restrict each 
other, strive forward and backward and in this assume the character of 
chance for each other, and so, leaving out of account the influences of 
natural events, make it impossible to demonstrate a penetrating all- 
inclusive necessity of events." Just such a necessity, however, is to be 
brought to light as a result of that "objective" view of things! This is a 
presupposition which, when stated as a dogma by the historian, can take 
only a curious form; Schiller, of course, is quite clear about what is prop¬ 
erly subjective in this assumption when he says of the historian: "one ap¬ 
pearance after the other begins to withdraw from blind approximation, 
from lawless freedom, and as a fit member joins the ranks of a coherent 
whole— which , of course , only exists in his imagination." 20 But what is 
one to think of the claim of a famous historical virtuoso, a claim presented 

20. In 1789 Friedrich Schiller became a professor of history at the University of Jena. The 
quotation is from his inaugural lecture delivered on May 26 and 27, 1789. The emphasized 
phrase is in parentheses in Schiller. 




36 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 

with innocent faith, artfully hovering between tautology and absurdity: 
"it is not otherwise than that all human acts and endeavours are subject to 
the silent, often imperceptible, yet powerful and inexorable course of 
things?" In such a proposition one discerns no more enigmatical wisdom 
than unenigmatical folly; as in the saying of Goethe's court gardener: 
"nature may let herself be forced but not compelled", or in the notice on a 
booth at the fair of which Swift tells: "here is to be seen the largest 
elephant in the world with the exception of itself". For, after all, what is 
the opposition between the acts and endeavours of man and the course of 
things? In general I notice that such historians, as the one whom we have 
just quoted, cease to be instructive as soon as they generalize and in doing 
so show the feeling of their weakness in obscurities. In other sciences the 
generalities are what is most important so far as they contain laws: should 
propositions like the one quoted pretend to be laws however, then one 
could reply that the historian's labour in writing history is wasted; for 
what remains at all true in such propositions, after deduction of that dark 
and insoluble remainder of which we have spoken—is well known and 
even trivial; for the smallest range of experience brings it to the attention 
of everyone. But to trouble whole peoples for this and to expend years of 
difficult labour to this end is surely no different from heaping experiment 
upon experiment in the natural sciences long after the law can already be 
inferred from the available store of experiments: from which senseless ex¬ 
cess of experimentation, incidentally, contemporary natural science suf¬ 
fers according to Zollner. 21 If the value of a drama lies merely in its final 
and main thought, then the drama itself would be a very long, crooked 
and laborious way to its goal; and so I hope that history may not see its 
significance in general thoughts as a kind of bloom and fruit: rather that its 
value is just this, to describe with insight a known, perhaps common 
theme, an everyday melody, to elevate it, raise to a comprehensive sym¬ 
bol and so let a whole world of depth of meaning, power and beauty be 
guessed in it. 

But this requires above all a great artistic capacity, and creative over¬ 
view, a loving immersion in the empirical data, a poetic elaboration of 
given types—this, to be sure, requires objectivity, but as a positive prop¬ 
erty. Objectivity, however, is so often only a phrase. The dark tranquility 
of the artist's eye, flashing within yet unmoved without, is replaced by the 
affectation of tranquility; as lack of pathos and moral strength usually 
disguises itself as penetrating coolness of observation. In certain cases 
banality of sentiment and everyday wisdom, which by being so boring 
give the impression of tranquility and calm, dare to step forth and pretend 
to be that artistic condition in which the subject is silent and becomes quite 
imperceptible. Then all those items which do not arouse at all are searched 


21. The astrophysicist Johann Karl Friedrich Zollner (1836-1882). 


§6 


37 


out and the dullest word is just right. One goes so far as to assume that 
whoever is quite unconcerned about a past event has a calling to describe 
it. Philologists and Greeks relate to each other in this way: they are of no 
concern to each other—and this one is pleased to call "objectivity"! Where 
just the highest and rarest is to be described, there intentional and openly 
displayed detachment, the fabricated and soberly flat motivational ar¬ 
tifice, is nothing short of outrageous—when, that is, the vanity of the 
historian impels to this indifference parading as objectivity. Moreover 
one's judgment on such authors should to a considerable degree be moti¬ 
vated by the principle that a man has just as much vanity as he lacks 
understanding. No, at least be honest! Do not seek the semblance of that 
artistic power which is true objectivity, do not seek the semblance of 
justice if you are not ordained to the terrible calling of the just man. As 
though, moreover, it were the task of every age that it must be just about 
everything past! As a matter of fact ages and generations never have the 
right to be the judge of all earlier ages and generations: rather such an un¬ 
comfortable mission occasionally is the lot only of individuals, and the 
rarest at that. Who forces you to judge? And then—just inquire of your¬ 
selves whether you could be just even if you wanted to! As judges you 
must stand higher than the one to be judged; while you have only come 
later. The guests who are the last to arrive at table justifiably should 
receive the last places: and you want to have the first? Well then, at least 
do the highest and greatest; perhaps one will really make room for you 
then, even if you arrive last. 

Only from the standpoint of the highest strength of the present may you 
interpret the past: only in the highest exertion of your noblest qualities will 
you discern what is worthy of being known and preserved, what is great in 
the past. Like by like! Otherwise you will draw the past down to 
yourselves. Do not believe any historical writing if it does not issue from 
the head of the rarest minds; but you will always notice the quality of 
mind of such writing when it is required to assert something general or to 
repeat something generally known: the genuine historian must have the 
strength to recast the well known into something never heard before and 
to proclaim the general so simply and profoundly that one overlooks its 
simplicity because of its profundity and its profundity because of its 
simplicity. No one can be a great historian, an artistic man and a 
shallowpate at the same time: however one should not despise the workers 
who cart, heap up and sift because it is certain that they cannot become 
great historians; and even less should one confuse them with those 
historians but rather understand them to be the necessary helpers and 
underlings in the service of the master: somewhat as the French, with 
greater naivete than is possible among the Germans, used to speak of the 




38 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


historiens de M. Thiers. 22 These workers should gradually become great 
scholars, but can never be masters for all that. A great scholar and a great 
shallowpate—that will more easily go together under one hat. 

So: history is written by the experienced and superior man. If you have 
not had some higher and greater experiences than all others you will not 
know how to interpret anything great and high in the past. The past 
always speaks as an oracle: only as master builders of the future who 
know the present will you understand it. We now explain the extra¬ 
ordinarily deep and extensive effect of Delphi especially by the fact that 
the priests of Delphi had exact knowledge of the past; now it is proper to 
know that only the builder of the future has a right to judge the past. By 
looking forward and setting a great goal for yourselves you will also curb 
that rank impulse to analysis which now lays waste your present and 
almost makes impossible all calm and all peaceful growth and ripening. 
Draw about yourselves the fence of a great and embracing hope, a hopeful 
striving. Form an image for yourselves to which the future ought to corres¬ 
pond and forget the superstitition that you are epigoni. You have enough 
to ponder and invent by pondering that future life; but do not ask history 
to show the How? and Wherewith?. If, on the other hand, you live 
yourselves into the history of great men you will learn from it a highest 
commandment, to become ripe and to flee from that paralyzing educa¬ 
tional constraint of the age, which sees its advantage in preventing your 
becoming ripe, in order to rule and to exploit you unripe ones. And if you 
want biographies then not those with the refrain "Mr. So-and-so and His 
Time" but rather those on whose title page should be inscribed "A Fighter 
Against His Time". Satisfy your souls on Plutarch and dare to believe in 
yourselves when you believe in his heroes. A hundred such men educated 
against the modern fashion, that is, men who have ripened and are used to 
the heroic, could now silence forever the whole noisy pseudo-education of 
our time. 


7 

The historical sense, if it rules without restraint and unfolds all its im¬ 
plications, uproots the future because it destroys illusions and robs ex¬ 
isting things of their atmosphere in which alone they can live. Historical 
justice, even when it is practised truly and with pure intentions, is a terri¬ 
ble virtue because it always undermines the living and brings it to ruin: its 
judging is always annihilating. If no constructive drive is active behind the 
historical drive, if one does not destroy and clear away so that a future, 
already alive in our hope, may build its house on the cleared ground, if 

22. Louis Adolphe Thiers (1797-1877), French politician, journalist and historian,'whose 
Histoire du consulat et de I'empire was published in twenty volumes between 1845 and 1862. 


§7 


39 


justice alone rules, then the creative instinct is enfeebled and discouraged. 
A religion for example which, under the rule of pure justice, is to be 
transformed into historical knowledge, a religion which is to be 
thoroughly known in a scientific way, will at the end of this path also be 
annihilated. The reason is that the historical audit always brings to light so 
much that is false, crude, inhuman, absurd, violent, that the attitude of 
pious illusion, in which alone all that wants to live can live, is necessarily 
dispelled: only with love, however, only surrounded by the shadow of the 
illusion of love, can man create, that is, only with an unconditional faith 
in something perfect and righteous. Each man who is forced no longer to 
love unconditionally has had the root of his strength cut off: he must 
wither, that is, become dishonest. In such effects art is opposed to history: 
and only if history can bear being transformed into a work of art, that is, 
to become a pure art form, may it perhaps preserve instincts or even rouse 
them. But such a manner of writing history would thoroughly contradict 
the analytic and inartistic trend of our time, it would even be perceived as 
falsification. But history which only destroys without being guided by an 
inner constructive drive will in the long run make its instruments blase and 
unnatural: for such men destroy illusions and "whoever destroys illusion 
in himself and others will be punished by nature, the strictest tyrant." 23 
For some considerable time one may well occupy oneself with history 
quite harmlessly and unreflectively as though it were an occupation as 
good as any other; especially recent theology appears quite innocently to 
have taken up history and even now is hardly aware that in doing so, prob¬ 
ably quite against its will, it has entered the service of Voltaire's 
ecrasez , 24 Let no one suppose new and powerful constructive instincts 
behind this; one would then have to let the so-called Protestant Union 
count as the cradle of a new religion and the jurist Holtzendorf (the man 
who edited and wrote the preface to what is still widely called the Protes¬ 
tant Bible) might have to be acknowledged as John by the river Jordan. For 
a time perhaps the Hegelian philosophy, still smoking in older heads, may 
help to propagate that innocence, say, in that one distinguishes the "Idea 
of Christianity" from its many inadequate "forms of appearing" and talks 
oneself into thinking that it is the "love play of the Idea" to reveal itself in 
ever purer forms until finally it achieves the certainly purest, most 
transparent, hardly visible form in the brain of the contemporary 

23. Cf. J. W. von Goethe, Schriften zur Natur- und Wissenschaftslehre, Fragment liber die 
Natur, in Artemis - Gedenkausgabe der Werke, Briefe und Gesprache, ed. Ernst Beutler, 
Zurich und Stuttgart, 1948 ff., Vol. 16, p. 923. The quotation also occurs in E. von Hart¬ 
mann, Philosophie des Unbewupten, Berlin, 1869, p. 620. Nietzsche probably drew his 
quotation from here since it exactly matches von Hartmann's slight changes in Goethe's text. 

24. Ecrasez l'infame: (literally) crush the infamous one. Voltaire's motto aimed at 
superstitution and fanaticism impeding the progress of rational thought, thus, indirectly, at 
the Christian church. 




40 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


theologus liberalis vulgaris. 25 But if you listen to these most purified forms 
of Christianity talk about the earlier less purified forms then the impartial 
listener often gets the impression that it is not at all Christianity which is 
being discussed but rather—well, what are we to think of when we find 
Christianity characterized by "the greatest theologian of the century" as 
the religion which allows one "to feel oneself into all actual and a few 
merely possible religions", and when the "true church" is said to be the one 
which "becomes a fluid mass which knows no outline, in which each part 
is found at times here at times there and everything mingles peacefully"? 
Again, what are we to think of? 

What one can learn from Christianity, that as a result of a historicizing 
treatment it has become blase and unnatural until finally a completely 
historical, that is, just treatment has resolved it into pure knowledge about 
Christianity and so has annihilated it, all this one can study in everything 
that has life: that it ceases to live when it has been dissected completely 
and lives painfully and becomes sick once one begins to practise historical 
dissection on it. There are men who believe in the overturning, reforming, 
healing powers of German music among Germans: they are angered and 
deem it an injustice, perpetrated on what is most alive in our culture, when 
men such as Mozart and Beethoven already get buried under the whole 
learned rubbish of biography and are forced to answer a thousand imperti¬ 
nent questions by the systematic torture of historical criticism. Is not 
something, which in its living effect is not at all exhausted, done away 
with too soon, or at least paralyzed, when greedy curiosity is directed on 
countless minutiae of life and works and when one searches for intellec¬ 
tual problems where one ought to learn to live and forget all problems? 
Just imagine a few such modern biographers transferred to the birthplace 
of Christianity or the Lutheran Reformation; their sober pragmatizing 
curiosity might just have sufficed to make impossible every ghostly actio 
in distans: 26 or the most miserable animal can prevent the genesis of the 
mightiest oak by swallowing the acorn. Every living thing needs to be sur¬ 
rounded by an atmosphere, a mysterious circle of mist: if one robs it of 
this veil, if one condemns a religion, an art, a genius to orbit as a star 
without an atmosphere: then one should not wonder about its rapidly 
becoming withered, hard and barren. That is just how it is with all things 
great indeed, 


"which without some madness ne'er succeed" 27 
as Hans Sachs says in Die Meistersinger. 

25. The common liberal theologian. 

26. Action at a distance. 

27. Hans Sachs sings this line in Act III of Wagner's opera Die Meistersinger von Nurnberg. 


§7 


41 


But every people, even every man, who wants to become ripe needs 
such an enveloping madness, such a protective and veiling cloud; now, 
however, we hate ripening as such because history is honoured above life. 
One even sees cause to triumph in the fact that "science now begins to rule 
life": perhaps this will be achieved; but surely a life ruled in that way is not 
worth much because it is much less life and guarantees much less life for 
the future than the life which used to be ruled not by knowledge but by in¬ 
stincts and powerful illusion. But then, as I have said, it is not to be an age 
of finished, ripe and harmonious personalities but of common, maximally 
useful labour. Yet that merely signified: men are to be trained for the pur¬ 
poses of the age to lend a hand as soon as possible: they are to labour in 
the factory of common utility before they are ripe, or rather to prevent 
their ever becoming ripe—because that would be a luxury which would 
withdraw a lot of strength from "the labour market". One blinds some 
birds to make them sing more beautifully: I do not believe that today's 
men sing more beautifully than their grandfathers, but I do know that they 
are blinded early. But the means, the vile means used to blind them is 
much too bright, much too sudden, much too changeable light. The young 
man is whipped through all millennia: youths who understand nothing of 
war, of diplomatic action, of commercial policy are deemed worthy of 
being introduced to political history. But just as the young man runs 
through history so we moderns run through art galleries, so we listen to 
concerts. One may well feel that this sounds different from that, this 
makes a different impression from that: increasingly to lose this sense of 
surprise, no longer to be excessively astonished by anything, finally to 
tolerate everything—that is what we call historical sense, historical 
culture. To say it without making excuses: the flood of influences is so 
massive, the surprising, barbaric, violent crowds so overwhelmingly, 
"rolled into ugly clumps", upon the youthful soul, that it can only save 
itself by deliberately dulling its sensibility. With a finer and stronger con¬ 
sciousness we may well find another sentiment: disgust. The young man 
has become so homeless and doubts all customs and concepts. Now he 
knows it: things were different in all ages, it does not matter how you are. 
In melancholy apathy he lets opinion upon opinion pass by him and 
understands the meaning of Holderlin's words and mood when reading 
Diogenes Laertius concerning the lives and teachings of Greek 
philosophers: "here too I have experienced again what I have already 
noted a number of times, namely that the ephemeral and changing in 
human thoughts and systems has impressed me as being almost more 
tragic than the fates which alone one usually calls the actual ones." 28 No, 
such flooding, numbing, violent historicizing is certainly not required for 


28. Friedrich Holderlin's letter to Isaak von Sinclair dated December 24, 1798. 




42 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


youth as the ancients show, rather it is dangerous in the highest degree as 
the moderns show. Now, however, consider the historical student, the 
heir of a blase' indifference which appears all too soon, almost in his 
boyhood. Now he has acquired the "method" for his own work, the cor¬ 
rect technique and the refined tone in the manner of his master; a quite 
isolated little chapter of the past has fallen victim to his acuteness and the 
method he has learned; he has already produced or, to use a prouder 
word, he has "created", he has now become a servant of truth in deed and 
lord of the world of history. If he was "done" already as a boy, then he is 
now overdone: you only need to shake him and wisdom will fall into your 
lap with great rattling; yet the wisdom is rotten and every apple has its 
worm. Believe me: if men are to labour and become useful in the scientific 
factory before they are ripe, science will soon be ruined as well as the 
slaves put to use all too soon in this factory. I regret that one is already re¬ 
quired to use the linguistic jargon of slaveholders and employers in order 
to describe such conditions which ought to be thought basically free of 
utilities and exempted from the struggle for survival; but the words 'fac¬ 
tory', labour market', 'offer', 'utilization'—and all the rest of the auxiliary 
verbs 29 of egoism—involuntarily throng to one's lips if one wants to 
describe the youngest generation of scholars. Sterling mediocrity becomes 
ever more mediocre and science ever more useful in the economic sense. 
Actually the newest scholars are wise in only one respect and in this admit¬ 
tedly wiser than all men of the past, in all other respects only infinitely dif¬ 
ferent—to put it carefully—from all scholars of the old type. Nevertheless 
they demand honours and advantages for themselves, as though the state 
and public opinion were obligated to take the new coin just as seriously as 
the old. The carters have entered into a labour contract with each other 
and decreed the genius to be superfluous—for every carter is being 
stamped a genius; probably a later age will be able to tell that their struc¬ 
tures have been carted together, not joined together. Those who tirelessly 
use the modern cry of battle and sacrifice "Division of labour! Fall into 
line!" are for once to be told clearly and bluntly: if you want to further 
science as quickly as possible you will destroy it as quickly as possible; as 
the hen will perish if artificially forced to lay eggs too quickly. Granted, 
science has been furthered surprisingly quickly in the last decades: but just 
look at the scholars, the exhausted hens. They truly are no "harmonious" 
natures; they can only cackle more than ever because they lay eggs more 
often: of course, the eggs have become ever smaller (even if the books ever 
bigger). As the last and natural result we find the universally favoured 
"popularization" (next to "feminization" and "infantization") of science, 
that is the infamous re-cutting of the garment of science to fit a "mixed 
public"; to use tailor's German to describe a tailor's activity. Goethe saw a 


29. This seems odd after that list of nouns. But the same oddity is found in the German. 


§8 


43 


misuse in this and demanded that the sciences have an effect on the exter¬ 
nal world only through an elevated practice. Older generations of scholars 
moreover deemed such a misuse difficult and burdensome for good 
reason: equally for good reason it is easy for the younger scholars because 
they themselves, apart from a very small corner of knowledge, are a very 
mixed public and have its needs. They only need on occasion to sit down 
comfortably and they succeed in opening up their own little area of study 
as well to that mixed popular need and curiosity. Such a comfortable act 
one later calls pretentiously "modest condescension of a scholar to his peo¬ 
ple": while at bottom the scholar only descended to himself so far as he is 
not a scholar but a plebeian. Create for yourselves the concept of a "peo¬ 
ple": that concept you can never think nobly nor highly enough. Were you 
to think highly of the people you would also be merciful to them and 
would beware of offering them your historical aqua fortis 30 as a quicken¬ 
ing refreshing drink. But at bottom, you think very little of them because 
you are not permitted a true and well founded respect for their future, and 
you act as practical pessimists, I mean as men who are guided by a 
premonition of ruin and therefore become indifferent and careless of the 
welfare of others and even of their own. As long as the earth will still bear 
us! And if it will no longer bear us we can accept that too:—thus they feel 
and live an ironical existence. 


8 

It may appear surprising but should not be thought contradictory if 
despite the age's noisy, obtrusive and carefree rejoicing about its historical 
culture I nevertheless ascribe a kind of ironical self-consciousness to it, a 
pervasive inkling that there is no cause for rejoicing, a fear that perhaps all 
enjoyment of historical knowledge will soon be gone. A similar puzzle 
concerning individual personalities has been offered us by Goethe in his 
remarkable characterization of Newton: he finds in the depths (or more 
correctly: at the heights) of his being "an obscure inkling of his error", as 
though there were an expression, perceptible at particular moments, of a 
superior judging consciousness which has achieved a certain ironical over¬ 
view of its necessary inner nature. So one finds especially in the greater 
and more highly developed historical men a consciousness, often subdued 
to the point of general scepticism, of how great is the absurdity and 
superstition in the belief that the education of a people must be as 
predominantly historical as it is now; after all, the strongest peoples, 
strong, that is, in deeds and works, have lived differently, have raised 
their youth differently. But that absurdity, that superstition suits us—so 
goes the sceptical objection—us the latecomers, us the faded last shoots of 

30. Nitric acid. Literally, strong water. 




44 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


mighty and cheerful generations, us to whom Hesiod's prophecy applies 
that men would one day be born with grey hair and that Zeus would 
destroy this generation as soon as that sign has become visible in it. 
Historical education really is a kind of inborn grayheadedness, and those 
who bear its mark from childhood on surely must attain the instinctive 
belief in the old age of mankind: it is now fitting for old age, however, to 
engage in the activity of old men, that is, to look back, to tally and close 
our accounts, to seek consolation in the past through memories, in short, 
historical education. But the race of man is a tough and enduring thing and 
does not, after millennia, hardly even after hundreds of thousands of 
years, want to be observed in its steps—forward and backward—that is, it 
does not at all want to be observed as a whole by that infinitesimally small 
atomic speck, the individual man. Of what account, after all, are a couple 
of millennia (or expressed differently: the period of 34 consecutive lives of 
men calculated at 60 years each) that at the beginning of such a time we 
can still speak of a "youth" and at the end of it already of an "old age of 
mankind"! Does not this paralyzing belief in an already withering 
mankind rather harbour the misunderstanding, inherited from the Middle 
Ages, of a Christian theological conception, the thought that the end of 
the world is near, of the fearfully expected judgment? Does that concep¬ 
tion appear in different guise through the heightened historical need to 
judge, as though our age, the last possible one, were itself qualified to con¬ 
duct the last judgment of the whole past which the Christian faith expected 
not at all from man but from "the Son of Man"? At an earlier time this 
"memento mori " 31 addressed to mankind as well as the individual, was 
always a torturing thorn and, as it were, the high point of medieval 
knowledge and conscience. The counter dictum of a more recent time: 
"memento vivere" 32 frankly still sounds quite timid, lacks full-throated 
power and almost has something dishonest about it. For mankind is still 
tied to the memento mori and betrays it in its universal historical need: 
despite the most powerful beat of its wings knowledge has been unable to 
tear itself loose and attain freedom, a deep feeling of hopelessness has re¬ 
mained and has taken on that historical colouration by which all higher 
education and culture is now surrounded in melancholy darkness. A 
religion which, of all the hours of a human life, takes the last one to be the 
most important, which predicts an end to life on earth as such and con¬ 
demns the living to live in the fifth act of the tragedy surely stimulates the 
deepest and noblest powers, but is hostile toward all new planting, bold 
attempting, free desiring; it resists every flight into the unknown because it 
does not love there, does not hope there: it lets all becoming be forced on it 
only against its will in order, in good time, to push it aside or sacrifice it as 

31. Remember you must die. 


32. Remember to live. 


§8 


45 


a temptation to existence, as a liar about the value of existence. What the 
Florentines did when, under the influence of Savonarola's penitential ser¬ 
mons, they committed paintings, manuscripts, mirrors and masks to those 
famed sacrificial flames, Christianity would like to do to every culture 
which incites to striving further and takes for its motto memento vivere ; 
and if it is not possible to do this straightforwardly and without detour, 
that is through superior strength, it nevertheless attains its end if it allies 
itself with historical education, in most cases even without the latter's 
complicity, and now, speaking through this education, rejects with a 
shrug of the shoulders everything in the process of becoming and spreads 
over it the feeling of being very late arrivals and epigoni, in short, of being 
congenitally grey haired. The austere, deeply serious observation concern¬ 
ing the valuelessness of all that has been, concerning the ripeness of the 
world for judgment has dispersed itself into the sceptical consciousness 
that at any rate it is good to know all that has been since it is too late to do 
something better. In this way the historical sense makes its servants 
passive and retrospective; and almost only from momentary forgetfulness, 
at a brief period of inactivity of that sense, does the man struck ill by 
historical fever become active, only to dissect his deed as soon as it is done 
and by observing it analytically to prevent its having any further effect 
and finally to pare it down to "history". In this sense we still live in the 
Middle Ages and history is still a disguised theology: just as the reverence 
which the layman accords the scientific caste is a reverence inherited from 
the clergy. What earlier one gave to the church one now gives, even if 
more sparingly, to science: but that one gives at all is a consequence of the 
church and not of the modern spirit which rather, along with its other 
good qualities, is known to be somewhat miserly and a bungler when it 
comes to the noble virtue of liberality. 

Perhaps this observation does not please, perhaps just as little as the 
above derivation of the excess of history from the medieval memento mori 
and from the hopelessness which Christianity bears in its heart toward all 
coming times of earthly existence. But then let this explanation, which I of¬ 
fer with some doubt to be sure, be replaced by better explanations; for the 
origin of historical education—and its inner quite radical contradiction 
with the spirit of a "new age", a "modern consciousness"—this origin must 
itself in turn be historically understood, history must itself dissolve the 
problem of history, knowledge must turn its sting against itself—this 
threefold must is the imperative of the spirit of the "new age" if it really 
does contain something new, mighty, original and a promise of life. Or 
should it be true that we Germans—to leave the Romance peoples out of 
account—must in all higher matters of culture always only be "descen¬ 
dants" because this is all we could be; as Wilhelm Wackernagel 33 once 

33. Carl Heinrich Wilhelm Wackernagel (1806-1869) was, next to Jacob Grimm, the most 
eminent Germanist of his time. I have been unable to find the reference in either of two works 
by Wackernagel which Nietzsche owned. 


46 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


asserted this proposition, one well worth pondering: 'We Germans simply 
are a people of descendants, we are with all our higher knowledge and 
even with our faith always only successors of the ancient world; even the 
hostile ones who do not want it constantly breathe, beside the spirit of 
Christianity, the immortal spirit of ancient classical culture, and were one 
to succeed in eliminating these two elements from the vital air surrounding 
the inner man then not much would remain to sustain a spiritual life." But 
even if we could content ourselves with the vocation of being descendants 
of antiquity, even were we to resolve emphatically to take it seriously and 
conceive it greatly and in this emphasis to recognize our distinguishing and 
sole prerogative—we would nevertheless be constrained to ask whether it 
must eternally be our destiny to be pupils of fading antiquity: at some time 
it may be allowed step by step to set our goal higher and farther, at 
some time we ought to be allowed to claim the merit of having recreated 
in ourselves—also through our universal history—the spirit of Alexan¬ 
drian-Roman culture so fruitfully and magnificently as now to be entitled, 
as the noblest reward, to set ourselves the still mightier task of striv¬ 
ing behind and beyond this Alexandrian world and courageously to seek 
our standards of the great, the natural and human in the ancient Greek 
world. But there we will also find the actuality of an essentially 
unhistorical culture and a culture which is nevertheless, or rather 
therefore , unspeakably rich and full of life. Even were we Germans 
nothing but descendants—we could, by looking upon such a culture as an 
inheritance to be appropriated, be nothing greater and prouder than just 
descendants. 

Only this and nothing but this is meant here, that even the frequently 
distressing thought of being epigoni, when grandly conceived, may vouch¬ 
safe great effects and a hopeful desire for the future, in the individual as 
well as in a people: in so far, that is, as we conceive ourselves to be the 
heirs and successors of classical and astonishing powers, and see in that 
our honour and incentive. Not then as pale and feeble late arrivals of 
vigorous generations who eke out a frosty life as antiquarians and grave 
diggers of those generations. Such late arrivals, of course, live an ironic 
existence: annihilation follows upon the heels of their limping course 
through life; they shudder at the thought of this annihilation as they enjoy 
the past, for they are living memories, but, without heirs, their memory is 
meaningless. So the dull inkling overcomes them that their life is an in¬ 
justice, for no coming life can justify it. 

Yet were we to think of such antiquarian late arrivals as suddenly ex¬ 
changing that ironically painful modesty for shamelessness; let us think of 
them as with shrill voices they proclaim: the race is at its height, for only 
now does it know itself and has become revealed to itself—we would then 
have a spectacle in which, as in a parable, we could discover the 
significance of a certain very famous philosophy for German education. I 


§8 


47 


believe that there has been no dangerous change or turn in the German 
education of this century which has not become more dangerous through 
the enormous influence, continuing to the present moment, of this 
philosophy, the Hegelian. Truly the belief that one is a late arrival of the 
ages is paralyzing and upsetting: terrible and destructive it must seem, 
however, if one day such a belief, by a bold inversion, deifies this late ar¬ 
rival as the true meaning and purpose of all that has happened earlier, if 
his knowing misery is equated with a consummation of world history. 
Such a way of looking at things has accustomed the Germans to talk of the 
'world-process'' and to justify their own time as the necessary result of this 
world-process; such a way of looking at things has established history in 
place of the other spiritual powers, art and religion, as solely sovereign in 
so far as it is "the self-realizing concept", in so far as it is "the dialectic of 
the spirit of people" and the "Last Judgment". 

This history, understood in a Hegelian way, has contemptuously been 
called the sojourn of God on earth, which God, however, is himself first 
produced by history. But this God became transparent and intelligible to 
himself inside the Hegelian craniums and has already ascended all possible 
dialectical steps of his becoming up to that self-revelation: so that for 
Hegel the apex and terminus of world history coincided in his own Berlin 
existence. He should even have said that all things after him are properly 
judged to be only a musical coda of the world-historical rondo; more prop¬ 
erly yet, to be redundant. He did not say that: and so he implanted in the 
generation thoroughly leavened by him that admiration for the "power of 
history" which practically at every moment turns into naked admiration 
for success and leads to the idolatry of the factual: for which service one 
has now generally memorized the very mythological, but apart from that 
quite good German turn of phrase 'to take the facts into account'. But who 
once has learned to bend his back and bow his head before the "power of 
history" finally nods his "yes", mechanically like a Chinese, to every 
power, be this a government or a public opinion or a numerical majority, 
and moves his limbs precisely in the tempo in which some "power" or 
other pulls the string. If every success contains within itself a rational 
necessity, if every event is a victory of the logical or of the "idea"—then 
quickly down on your knees and up and down on every rung of the step 
ladder of "success"! What, there are no more ruling mythologies? What, 
religions are about to become extinct? Just look at the religion of historical 
power, take note of the priests of the idea-mythology and their abused 
knees! Are not even all the virtues adherents of this new faith? Or is it not 
selflessness when historical man permits himself to be drained to the point 
of becoming an objective looking glass? Is it not generosity to renounce all 
authority in heaven and on earth by worshiping authority as such in every 
authority? Is it not justice always to have the scales of powers ready to 
hand and always to observe meticulously which, as the stronger and 


48 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


heavier, will tip the balance? And what a school of decorum it is to con¬ 
template history in this way! To take everything objectively, not to be 
angered by anything, to love nothing, to comprehend everything, how 
gentle and pliable this makes one; and even if someone raised in this 
school on occasion is publicly angry and frets, one is pleased by this for 
one knows that it is only meant artistically, it is ira and studium, and yet 
through and through sine ira et studio. 34. 

What antiquated thoughts I harbour in my breast toward such a com¬ 
plex of mythology and virtue! But they must out for once, and may 
everyone have a good laugh. I would say the following: history always in¬ 
culcates: '"once upon a time", the moral: "you ought not" or "you ought 
not to have". So history becomes a compendium of actual immorality. 
How grievously he would err who would at the same time view history as 
the judge of this actual immorality! That a Raphael had to die at the age of 
thirty-six, for example, is offensive to morality: such a being ought never 
to die. If now you want to come to the aid of history, as apologists of the 
actual, you will say: he expressed all he had to say and given a longer life 
he would always only have produced beauty as the same beauty, not as 
new beauty, and things of this sort. Thus you are advocates of the devil, 
namely by making of success, of fact, your idol: while a fact is always 
stupid and has at all times resembled a calf more than a god. As apologists 
of history, moreover, you are prompted to ignorance: for only because 
you do not know what such a natura naturans 35 as Raphael is do you not 
begin to seethe when you realized that he existed and will exist no more. 
Someone has recently wanted to instruct us that at the age of 82 Goethe 
was burned out: and yet I would gladly exchange a few years of the 
"burned out" Goethe for whole cart loads of fresh ultra-modern lives, so 
as still to have a share of such conversations as Goethe held with Ecker- 
mann, 36 and so as to be preserved from the up to date instruction of the 
legionaries of the moment. How few living men have any right to live, 
compared to such dead ones! That the many live and those few live no 
more is nothing but a brutal truth, that is, an incorrigible stupidity, a 
blunt "so it happens to be" over against the moral "it ought not to be so". 
Yes, over against morality! For you may talk of whatever virtue you 
want, of justice, generosity, courage, of the wisdom and compassion of 

34. This presents some difficulty for the translator. Nietzsche's point is that such a man's 
ira (indignation) and studium (involvement) are an act, performed merely for effect, remain¬ 
ing a case not of studium (Latin: involvement) but of Studium (German: course of objective 
studies maintaining proper distance from the subject matter), i.e. it remains a case of sine ira 
et studio (without indignation and involvement), which is the phrase used by Tacitus (An¬ 
nals, Ch. I) to describe his approach to Roman history. 

35. Creative nature as distinct from natura naturata or created nature. 

36. Cf. J. W. von Goethe, Conversations with Eckermann, M. Walter Dunne, New York 
and London, 1901. 


§9 


49 


man—everywhere he is virtuous only because he was outraged by that 
blind power of facts, by the tyranny of the actual, and subjects himself to 
laws which are not laws of those fluctuations of history. He always swims 
against the historical waves, whether he controls his passion as the nearest 
stupid fact of his existence or whether he commits himself to honesty while 
all around him lies spin their glittering nets. Were history nothing more 
than "the world system of passion and error" man would have to read in it 
as Goethe counselled that Werther 37 be read: just as though it called "be a 
man and do not follow me!" Fortunately, however, it also preserves the 
memory of the great fighters against history , that is, against the blind 
power of the actual, and puts itself in the pillory precisely by singling out 
just those as the proper historical natures who concerned themselves little 
with the "so it is" but rather followed a "so it ought to be" with merry 
pride. Not to carry their generation to the grave but to found a new 
generation—that drives them forward incessantly: and even if they are 
born as latecomers—there is a way of living which will erase this from 
memory—the coming generations will only know them as firstcomers. 

9 

Is our time perhaps such a firstcomer? —Indeed the vehemence of its 
historical sense is so great and expresses itself in such a universal and 
necessarily unbounded manner that coming times will praise it as a 
firstcomer in at least this—if, that is, there will be coming times at all 
understood in the cultural sense. But precisely this raises grave doubts. 
Hard by the pride of modern man we find his irony about himself, his 
awareness that he must live in a historicizing and, as it were, evening 
mood, his fear of being unable to save for the future any of his youthful 
hopes and youthful strength. Here and there one goes further, into 
cynicism , and justifies the course of history, of the total development of 
the world, essentially for the everyday use of modern man according to the 
cynical canon: exactly this moment had to come just as it is, man had to 
become what men are now and nothing else, no one may oppose this 
"must". He who cannot endure irony flees into the comfort of cynicism of 
this kind; the last decade, moreover, offers to make him a present of one of 
its most beautiful inventions, a well rounded and full phrase for that cyni¬ 
cism: it calls his way of living in step with the times and quite unreflectively 
"the total surrender of his personality to the world process". The personality 
and the world process! The world process and the personality of the flea- 
beetle! If only one did not eternally have to hear the hyperbole of all hyper¬ 
boles, the word: world, world, world, since, after all, if we remain honest, 
everyone ought only to speak of man, man, man! Heirs of the Greeks and 
the Romans? of Christianity? All that seems nothing to those cynics; but 

37. Goethe's novel The Sorrows of Young Werther is meant. 


50 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


heirs of the world process! Peaks and targets of the world process! Mean¬ 
ing and solution to all riddles of becoming expressed in modern man, the 
ripest fruit on the tree of knowledge—that I call rising exultation; by 
this token the firstlings of all ages may be known even if they have come 
last. This far the contemplation of history has never yet flown, not even in 
a dream; for now the history of man is only the continuation of the history 
of animals and plants; even in the lowest depths of the sea the historical 
universalist still finds traces of himself, as living slime; astonished, as 
though it were a miracle, by the enormous road man has already come, his 
gaze is dizzied by the yet more astonishing miracle, by modern man 
himself who has attained an overview of this road. High and proud he 
stands on the pyramid of the world process; by placing the keystone of his 
knowledge on top he seems to be calling to nature listening round about: 
"we are at the goal, we are the goal, we are the completion of nature". 

Overproud European of the nineteenth century, you are mad! Your 
knowledge does not complete nature but only kills your own. Just measure 
your height as a knower by your depth as a doer. Admittedly you climb 
the sunbeams of your knowledge upwards to heaven, but also downwards 
to chaos. Your manner of moving, that is, of climbing as a knower, is your 
doom; foundation and solid earth retreat into uncertainty for you; there 
are no more supports for your life, only gossamer threads which every 
new grip of your knowledge tears apart. —But not another serious word 
about this, since it is possible to say a cheerful one. 

This madly thoughtless fragmentation and fraying of all foundations, 
their dissolution into an ever flowing and dispersing becoming, the tireless 
entangling and historicizing of all that has come to be by modern man, 
that great garden spider in the node of the world web—all this may occupy 
and worry the moralist, the artist, the pious man and perhaps the 
statesman as well; we, however, will for once be cheered up by it today by 
seeing all this in the glittering magic mirror of a philosophical parodist in 
whose head the age has achieved an ironical consciousness of itself, and 
that clearly "to the point of infamy" (to speak the language of Goethe). 
Hegel once taught us "when the spirit makes a move we philosophers are 
also at hand ": 38 our time made a move, into self-irony, and behold!, E. 

38. The spirit at issue here is the universal knowing spirit which, according to Hegel, is the 
proper subject of world history. The self-transforming development of this spirit, for which 
peoples and nations are the means, constitutes world history. The move referred to in the 
quotation is the transition from one form of the spirit to another. At such a time, when a 
form of life has fully unfolded itself and enters a decline, philosophers are at hand to perform 
a fourfold function. They capture the spirit of the declining age in thought; they contribute to 
the demise of the present form of life by attacking the morality, religion and political institu¬ 
tions of their day; they flee from reality into an ideal world of thought which serves as a con¬ 
solation in times of decay and unhappiness; their philosophy provides a birthplace for the 
next form of the spirit, preparing in thought for the next world historical reality. Cf. G. W. F. 
Hegel, Einleitung in die Geschichte der Philosophie , ed. Johannes Hoffmeister (1940) and 
Friedhelm Nicolin (1959), Verlag von Felix Meiner, Hamburg, 1966, esp. pp. 149-155 and pp. 
285-287. I have been unable to find the reference. 


§9 


51 


von Hartmann was also at hand and had written his famous philosophy of 
the unconscious 39 —or, to speak more clearly, his philosophy of un¬ 
conscious irony. Rarely have we read a merrier invention and a more 
philosophical prank than Hartmann's; whoever is not enlightened about 
becoming and, more than that, does not have his inner life set in order by 
him, is surely a living anachronism. Beginning and end of the world pro¬ 
cess, from the first startled awakening to consciousness to its being flung 
back into the void, together with the precisely determined task of our 
generation for the world process, all this presented as flowing from the so 
wittily invented inspirational font of the unconscious and glowing in an 
apocalyptic light, everything fashioned so deceptively and with such 
staunch seriousness as though it really were serious philosophy and not 
merely a philosophical jest—such a composition establishes its creator as 
one of the foremost philosophical parodists of all time: let us then sacrifice 
on his altar, let us sacrifice a lock of hair to the inventor of a true 
panacea—to steal an expression of admiration from Schleiermacher . 40 For 
what medicine is more effective against an excess of historical education 
than Hartmann's parody of all world history? 

Were one to say quite matter-of-factly what Hartmann proclaims to us 
from the smoke enshrouded tripod of unconscious irony one would say: 
he proclaims to us that our age need only be just as it is if humanity is for 
once to become thoroughly fed up with this life: which we believe with all 
our heart. That frightening ossification of the age, that restless rattling of 
bones—as David Strau fi has naively depicted it for us as the most beauti¬ 
ful actuality—is justified by Hartmann not only from behind, ex causis ef- 
ficientibus , 41 but even from before ex causa finali ; 42 the rogue lets light 
stream over our age from judgment day and so it is found to be very good, 
for him, that is, who wants to suffer as much as possible from the indigest¬ 
ibility of life and for whom that judgment day cannot arrive soon enough. 
To be sure, Hartmann calls the stage which humanity is now approaching 
"manhood ": 43 according to his description, however, that is the happy 
condition in which there is only "sterling mediocrity " 44 and art is "perhaps 
what an evening performance of a farce is to a Berlin financier ", 45 in which 

39. Eduard von Hartmann, Philosophie des Unbewufiten, Berlin, 1869. 

40. Friedrich Daniel Ernst Schleiermacher (1768-1834), German theologian and 
philosopher, one of the most influential thinkers of nineteenth century Protestantism. 

41. Through efficient causes. 

42. Through a final cause. 

43. von Hartmann, op. cit., passim, especially pp. 619, 625. 

44. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 618. 

45. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 619. 


52 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


"geniuses are no longer a requirement of the times because that would be 
to throw pearls before swine, or again because the times have advanced 
beyond the stage which deserved genuises to a more important one", 46 i.e., 
to that stage of social development in which each worker "leads a comfor¬ 
table life with a workday which leaves sufficient leisure time to cultivate 
his intellect." Rogue of rogues, you express the yearning of contemporary 
mankind: but you also know which spectre will stand at the end of this 
manhood of mankind as a result of that intellectual education to sterling 
mediocrity—disgust. Evidently matters are quite wretched, but they will 
be much more wretched yet, "the antichrist is visibly extending his grasp 
further and further" 47 —but so it must be and so it must come, for with all 
this we are well on our way—to being disgusted with all existence. 
"Therefore heartily forward in the world process as workers in the 
vineyard of the Lord, for the process alone can lead to redemption!" 48 

The vineyard of the Lord! The process! To redemption! Who does not 
here see and hear historical education, which only knows the word 
'become', as it intentionally adopts the guise of a parodic monster, as it 
says the most wanton things about itself through the grotesque mask it 
holds up! For just what does this last roguish appeal to the workers in the 
vineyard demand of them? In what work are they to strive forward hearti¬ 
ly? Or, to put the question differently: what is left to do for the historically 
educated man, the modern fanatic of the process, swimming and drowned 
in the flow of becoming, in order to gather in the harvest of that disgust, 
the delectable grape of that vineyard? —He has nothing to do but to con¬ 
tinue to live as he has lived, to continue to love what he has loved, to con¬ 
tinue to hate what he has hated, and to continue to read the newspaper 
which he has read; for him there is only one sin—to live differently than he 
has lived. But how he has lived we are told, with the exaggerated distinct¬ 
ness of writing carved in stone, by that famous page with the sentences 
printed large which has transported the whole contemporary educational 
ferment into blind ecstasy and ecstatic rage because it believed it read in 
these sentences its own justification in an apocalyptic light. For of each in¬ 
dividual the unwitting parodist demanded "the total surrender of per¬ 
sonality to the world process for the sake of its goal, the redemption of the 
world"; 49 or still more clearly: "the affirmation of the will to live is provi¬ 
sionally to be proclaimed as that which alone is correct; for only in the 
total surrender to life and its pains, not in cowardly personal resignation 
and withdrawal, is something to be achieved for the world process", 50 

46. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 619. 

47. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 610. 

48. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 637-8. 

49. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 638. 

50. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 638. 



§9 


53 


"striving for individual abnegation of the will is just as foolish and useless, 
and even more foolish than suicide". 51 "The thoughtful reader will under¬ 
stand, even without further indication, what shape a practical philosophy 
erected on these principles will assume, and that such a philosophy cannot 
contain the estrangement from, but only the full reconciliation with life". 52 

The thoughtful reader will understand: and one could misunderstand 
Hartmann! And how unspeakably funny it is that one did misunderstand 
him! Shall we say that contemporary Germans are very perceptive? A 
doughty Englishman misses delicacy of perception in them, he even ven¬ 
tures to say “in the German mind there does seem to be something splay , 
something blunt-edged , unhandy and infelicitous " 53 —would the great 
German parodist contradict this? To be sure, according to his explanation 
we are approaching "that ideal condition in which the human race makes 
its history consciously": but evidently we are still a good distance from 
that perhaps still more ideal condition in which mankind will read Hart¬ 
mann s book consciously. Once it comes to that no man will let the words 
"world process" slip through his lips unless these lips are smiling; for one 
will be reminded of the time when the parodic gospel of Hartmann was 
listened to, imbibed, disputed, venerated, propagated and canonized with 
the whole respectability of that " German mind ", even with the "distorted 
seriousness of an owl", as Goethe says. But the world must go forward, 
that ideal condition cannot be achieved by dreaming, we must fight and 
struggle to achieve it, and only through cheerfulness is there a way to 
redemption, the redemption from this misleading owlish seriousness. 
There will come a time when one will wisely refrain from all constructions 
of the world process or of the history of mankind, a time wTien one no 
longer considers the masses at all but once again the individuals who con¬ 
stitute a kind of bridge across the wild stream of becoming. These do not, 
as it were, continue a process but live in timeless simultaneity, thanks to 
history, which permits such co-operation, they live as the republic of 
geniuses 54 of which Schopenhauer speaks somewhere; one giant calls to 
the other across the bleak intervals of ages and, undisturbed by the wan¬ 
tonly noisy dwarfs who creep away beneath them, the lofty conversation 
of spirits continues. The task of history is to be the mediator between them 
and so again and again to provide the occasion for and lend strength to the 
production of greatness. No, the goal of humanity cannot lie at the end 
but only in its highest specimens. 

51. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 635-6. 

52. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 638. 

53. The italicized passages are in English in the original. I have not found the source of the 
quotation. 

54. Arthur Schopenhauer, Neue Paralipomena, Leipzig, Reclam, n.d, §517. 


54 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


Our jester, of course, responds to this with that admirable dialectic 
which is just as genuine as its admirers are admirable: "As little as it would 
be compatible with the concept of development to ascribe an infinite past 
duration to the world process because in that case every conceivable 
development would already have been gone through which, after all, is 
not the case (oh rogue!), just as little can we concede an infinite future 
duration of the process; each would invalidate the concept of a develop¬ 
ment toward a goal (oh more of a rogue!) and would equate the world pro¬ 
cess with the Danaides' drawing water. The complete victory of the logical 
over the illogical (oh rogue of rogues!), however, must coincide with the 
temporal end of the world process, with judgment day." 55 No, you clear 
and mocking spirit, as long as the illogical still holds sway as it does these 
days, as long, for example, as one can still talk with general agreement of a 
"world process" as you do, judgment day is still far away: for it is still too 
cheerful on this earth, many an illusion still flourishes, for example the il¬ 
lusion of your contemporaries about you, we are not yet ripe to be flung 
back into your void: for we believe that things will become even more jol¬ 
ly once one has begun to understand you, you misunderstood unconscious 
one. But if, in spite of that, disgust should come with full force as you have 
prophesied it to your readers, if your depiction of your present and future 
should turn out to be correct—and no one has so despised both, despised 
with such disgust as you—then I will gladly be prepared to vote with the 
majority in the way proposed by you that next Saturday evening at 
precisely twelve o'clock your world is to end; and our decree is to con¬ 
clude: beginning tomorrow there will be no more time and no more 
newspapers. 56 But perhaps it will have no effect and we will have decreed 
in vain: well, in that case we will at least not be short of time for a 
beautiful experiment. We take a balance and into one of the pans place 
Hartmann's unconscious and into the other one Hartmann's world pro¬ 
cess. There are people who believe that they will weigh the same: for each 
pan would contain an equally bad word and an equally good joke. —Once 
we understand Hartmann's joke no one will use his words about the 
"world process" anymore except as a joke. In fact it is high time to ad¬ 
vance with a whole army of satirical malice against the aberrations of the 
historical sense, against the excessive delight with the process to the detri¬ 
ment of existence and life, against the thoughtless displacement of all 
perspectives; and we should always praise the author of the philosophy of 
the unconscious for being the first to succeed in clearly perceiving the 
ridiculous in the conception of the "world process" and, through the 
peculiar seriousness of his presentation, to make it possible to appreciate it 
even more clearly. What the "world" is there for, what "humanity" is there 

55. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 637. 

56. The connection between time (Zeit) and newspaper (Zeitung) is lost in translation. 


§9 


55 


for is not to concern us for the time being, unless we want to be funny: for 
there just isn't anything funnier and more cheerful on the world's stage 
than the presumptuousness of those little worms called man; but do ask 
what you, the individual, are there for, and if no one else can tell you then 
just try sometime to justify the meaning of your existence a posteriori , as it 
were, by setting yourself a purpose, a goal, a "for this", a lofty and noble 
"for this". And perish in the attempt—I know of no better life's purpose 
than to perish, animae magnae prodigus, 57 in attempting the great and im¬ 
possible. If, on the other hand, the doctrines of sovereign becoming, of the 
fluidity of all concepts, types and kinds, of the lack of any cardinal dif¬ 
ference between man and the animal—doctrines which I take to be true 
but deadly—are flung at the people for one more lifetime in the current 
mania for education, then let no one be surprised if that people perishes of 
pettiness and misery, of ossification and selfishness, that is, if to begin 
with it disintegrates and ceases to be a people: it may then perhaps be 
replaced in the arena of the future by systems of individual egoism, 
fellowships intent on the rapacious exploitation of non-fellows and similar 
creations of utilitarian vulgarity. To prepare the way for these creations 
one need only continue to write history from the standpoint of the masses 
and to look in it for those laws which can be derived from the needs of 
these masses, that is, for the laws of motion of the lowest loam and clay 
strata of society. The masses seem to me worthy of notice in only three 
respects: first as blurred copies of great men, produced on bad paper with 
worn plates, further as resistance to the great, and finally as the tools of 
the great; beyond that, may the devil and statistics take them! What, 
statistics prove that there are laws of history? Laws? Yes, it proves how 
mean and disgustingly uniform the masses are: is one to call laws the effect 
of inertia, stupidity, aping, love and hunger? Well, we will admit it, but 
with that the following proposition is also sure: so far as there are laws in 
history, laws are worth nothing and history is worth nothing. But just this 
kind of history is now universally valued, the kind which takes the great 
mass drives to be the important and chief point of history and regards all 
great men only as the clearest expression, the bubbles, as it were, which 
become visible on the flood. Here the masses are, out of themselves, to 
give birth to greatness, that is, chaos is, out of itself, to give birth to order; 
and in the end, of course, the hymn to the birth-giving masses is intoned. 
Everything is then called "great" which has for a prolonged time moved 
such masses and which, as one says, has been "a historical power". But is 
that not quite intentionally to confuse quantity with quality? If the dull 
masses have found some thought or other, say a religious thought, quite 
adequate, tenaciously defend it and drag it through centuries: then and on¬ 
ly just then the finder and founder of that thought is said to be great. But 
why! The noblest and highest has no effect on the masses; the historical 
57. Approximately: having expended all one's mental energy. 


56 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


success of Christianity, its historical power, tenacity and endurance, all 
this fortunately proves nothing as regards the greatness of its founder since 
basically it would testify against him: but between him and that historical 
success there is a very earthly and dark layer of passion, error, greed for 
power and honour, of the continuing effects of the imperium romanum 58 a 
layer from which Christianity drew that earthy taste and bit of soil which 
made possible its continuation in this world and, as it were, gave it its 
durability. Greatness is not to depend on success, and Demosthenes had 
greatness even though he had no success. The purest and most truthful 
adherents of Christianity have always questioned and impeded rather than 
promoted its worldly success, its so-called "historical power"; for they 
used to take a stand outside the "world" and did not concern themselves 
with the "process of the Christian idea", which is why they have mostly re¬ 
mained quite unknown and unnamed by history. Expressed in a Christian 
way: the devil is the regent of the world and the master of successes and 
progress; he is the real power in all historical power, and so it will essen¬ 
tially remain—even though this may ring quite painfully in the ears of an 
age which is used to the deification of success and historical power. For it 
is practiced in giving things new names and rechristening the devil himself. 
It is certainly the hour of a great danger: men seem to be near to discover¬ 
ing that the egoism of individuals, of groups or of the masses has at all 
times been the lever of historical movements; at the same time, however, 
one is in no way troubled by this discovery, but rather one decrees: let 
egoism be our god. With this new faith one prepares quite clearly and in¬ 
tentionally to erect coming history on egoism: only it is to be a prudent 
egoism, one which imposes a few restrictions on itself to achieve lasting 
security, one which studies history so as to get to know imprudent egoism. 
With these studies one has learned that the state has a quite special mission 
in the world system of egoism which is to be founded: it is to be the patron 
of all prudent egoisms in order, with its military and police force, to guard 
them against the terrible eruptions of imprudent egoism. For the same 
reason history too—namely as the history of animals and men—is careful¬ 
ly stirred into the dangerous, because imprudent, mass of the people and 
labouring strata, because one knows that a grain of historical education is 
capable of breaking rude and dull instincts and desires or to guide them 
onto the road of refined egoism. On the whole: man is now "giving 
thought to a practical, livable arrangement in his earthly home, one which 
prudently looks to the future", 59 as E. von Hartmann put it. The same 
author calls such a period the "manhood of man" and so ridicules what to¬ 
day is called "a man" as though only a sober selfseeker is understood by 
that; and he also prophesies a corresponding old age to follow such a 

58. The Roman empire. 

59. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 618. 


§9 


57 


manhood evidently also only to vent his ridicule on those of our old men 
who are typical of the times: for he speaks of their ripe contemplative at¬ 
titude with which they '"overview the wild and stormy suffering of their 
past lives and comprehend the vanity of the former supposed goals of their 
striving". 60 No, to the manhood of that calculating and historically 
educated egoism corresponds an old age which clings to life with repulsive 
greed and without dignity, and then 

"The last scene of all 
That ends this strange eventful history. 

Is second childishness and mere oblivion, 

Sans teeth, sans eyes, sans taste, sans everything." 61 

Whether the dangers of our life and of our culture come from these vul¬ 
gar, toothless and tasteless old men, or whether they come from those so- 
called "men" of Hartmann: against both of them we intend with our very 
teeth to hold fast the right of our youth and shall not tire to defend the 
future of our youth against those iconoclasts who would smash their image 
of the future. In this battle, however, we must make an especially distres¬ 
sing observation: that the aberrations of the historical sense from which 
the present time suffers are intentionally furthered , encouraged and—used. 

And they are used against youth in order to train them to that manhood 
of egoism which is everywhere aspired to; they are used in order to break 
the natural aversion of youth with a transfiguring, that is scientific- 
magical illumination of that manly-unmanly egoism. One knows after all 
what history is capable of, owing to a certain preponderance one knows it 
only too well: of uprooting the strongest instincts of youth: fire, 
obstinacy, self-forgetting and love, of dampening the heat of its sense of 
justice, of suppressing or repressing its desire to ripen slowly with the 
counter-desire to be done quickly, to be useful quickly, to be fruitful 
quickly, of infecting honesty and boldness of feeling with doubt; it is even 
capable of defrauding youth of its fairest privilege, of its strength to plant 
within itself a great thought with brimful confidence and to let it grow out 
of itself into an even greater one. A certain excess of history is capable of 
all of this, we have seen it: through a continuous displacement of horizon- 
perspectives, through the elimination of an enveloping atmosphere it no 
longer permits man to feel and act unhistorically. From an infinite horizon 
he then retreats into himself, into the smallest egoistic region, and there 
must wither and dry up: probably he will attain to cleverness: never to 
wisdom. One can talk to him, he reckons with and is reconciled to the 


60. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 625. A phrase is dropped in the quotation. 

61. W. Shakespeare, As You Like It, Act II, Scene VII. 


58 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


facts, is not given to emotional outbursts, blinks and understands how to 
seek his own advantage or that of his party in the advantage and disad¬ 
vantage of others; he unlearns superfluous modesty and so step by step 
becomes a Hartmannian 'man" and "old man". But he ought to become 
that, just that is the meaning of what is now demanded so cynically, of the 
"total surrender of the personality to the world process" 62 —for the sake of 
its goal, of the redemption of the world, as E. von Hartmann, the rogue, 
assures us. Mind you, the will and goal of these Hartmannian "men" and 
"old men" can hardly be said to be exactly the redemption of the world: 
but surely the world would be more redeemed if it were redeemed from 
these men and old men. For then would come the realm of youth.— 

10 

Thinking of youth at this point I cry land ho! land ho! Enough and more 
than enough of this passionately searching and erring voyage on dark 
alien seas! Now a coastline is finally in sight: whatever it may be like we 
must land there, and the worst harbour of refuge is better than once again 
to stagger back into hopeless sceptical infinity. Let us just hold fast to land 
now; later we shall no doubt find the good harbours and make the ap¬ 
proach of those who follow easier. 

Dangerous and exciting was this voyage. How far are we now from the 
quiet contemplation with which we first saw our ship float out to sea. In 
tracking down the dangers of history we have found ourselves most 
severely exposed to them; we ourselves display the traces of those suffer¬ 
ings which, as a consequence of an excess of history, came over men of re¬ 
cent times, and precisely this treatise, as I will not conceal, shows its 
modern character, the character of weak personality, in the excess of 
criticism, in the immaturity of its humanity, in the frequent transition 
from irony to cynicism, from pride to scepticism. And yet I trust in the in¬ 
spiring power which instead of a genius guides my vehicle, I trust in youth 
to have guided me correctly when now it forces me to protest against the 
historical education of modern youth and when in protest I demand that 
above all men must learn to live and use history only in the service of the 
life they have learned to live. One has to be young to understand this pro¬ 
test, and considering the early grey hair of our present youth one can 
hardly be young enough still to feel against what is really being protested 
here. An example will be helpful. Not much more than a century ago in 
Germany a natural instinct for what one calls poetry awoke in a few 
young people. Do we perhaps think that preceding generations as well as 
their contemporaries did not speak at all of that art which was alien and 
unnatural to them? We know the reverse: that with all their strength they 

62. von Hartmann, op. cit., p. 638. 


§10 


59 


thought, wrote, quarrelled about "poetry" with words about words, 
words, words. The inception of that awakening to life of a word did not 
also spell the death of those word makers, in a certain sense they still live 
now; for if, as Gibbon 63 says, nothing but time, though much time, is re¬ 
quired for a world to perish, so nothing but time, though much more time, 
is required for a false concept to perish in Germany, the "land of little-by¬ 
little". Nevertheless: there are now perhaps a hundred more people than a 
hundred years ago who know what poetry is; perhaps a hundred years 
later there will again be a hundred more people who in the meantime have 
also learned what culture is and that the Germans until now have no 
culture however much they may talk and strut about. They will find the 
general pleasure which the Germans take in their "culture" just as incredi¬ 
ble and silly as we find it that Gottsched 64 was once recognized as classic 
or that Ramler 65 had the reputation of a German Pindar. They will 
perhaps judge that this culture was only a kind of knowledge about culture 
and quite a false and superficial knowledge at that. False and superficial, 
that is, because the contradiction between life and knowledge was endured 
because what is characteristic in the culture of truly cultured peoples was 
not seen at all: that culture can only grow and blossom out of life; while 
with the Germans it is only tacked on like a paper flower or poured over 
like icing and will for that reason always have to remain deceitful and un¬ 
fruitful. The education of German youth, however, proceeds precisely 
from this false and unfruitful concept of culture: its aim, quite purely and 
loftily conceived, is not at all the liberally educated man but the scholar, 
the scientific man, namely, the scientific man who will be useful as soon as 
possible, who takes a position outside of life in order to know it quite 
clearly; its result, viewed in a mean empirical way, is the historico- 
aesthetic cultural Philistine, the precocious newly wise chatter box on mat¬ 
ters of state, church and art, the sensorium of thousands of sensations, the 
insatiable stomach which yet does not know what honest hunger and 

63. I have not found this reference in the Autobiography which seems to be the only book 
by Gibbon that Nietzsche ever read. A reading of The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire 
makes it unlikely that the observation is actually from Gibbon. Of the four causes of the ruin 
of Rome which he identified (Ch. 71) he does not think "the injuries of time and nature" to be 
the most important or by themselves sufficient. He thinks that "the domestic quarrels of the 
Romans" were "the most potent and forcible cause of [Rome's] destruction" and calls the Col¬ 
iseum, which figures as a symbol of Rome, "an edifice, had it been left to time and nature, 
which might perhaps have claimed an eternal duration." 

64. Johann Christoph Gottsched (1700-1766), a German literary theorist and critic who in¬ 
troduced French eighteenth century classical standards of taste into German literature, 
especially drama. His most influential work Versuch einer kritischen Dichtkunst fur die 
Deutschen was published in 1730. In that year he was appointed professor of poetry at the 
University of Leipzig and four years later became professor of logic and metaphysics. 

65. Karl Wilhelm Ramler (1725-1798), a German poet who for forty-two years was pro¬ 
fessor of logic at the military school in Berlin and toward the end of his life (1790-1796) was 
director of the national theatre. 


60 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


thirst are. That an education with that aim and this result is contrary to 
nature is felt only by the man who is not yet completely fashioned by it, it 
is only felt by the instinct of youth because it still has the instinct of nature 
which is first broken artificially and violently by that education. But 
whoever wants in turn to break this education must help youth to have its 
say, he must light the way for its unconscious resistance with the clarity of 
concepts and turn it into a conscious, loudly articulate consciousness. And 
how is he going to achieve such a strange goal? 

Above all by destroying a superstition, the belief in the necessity of that 
educational procedure. It is, after all, a prevailing opinion that there is no 
other possibility at all than just our present tiresome actuality. Just 
examine the literature of higher education in the last decades with that in 
mind: the examiner will, with indignant astonishment, become aware how 
uniformly the whole intent of education is conceived in all the fluctuating 
proposals and vehemence of disagreement, how thoughtlessly the prevail¬ 
ing product, the 'educated man" as he is understood at present, is accepted 
as the necessary and rational foundation of all further education. But that 
monotonous canon would read approximately thus: the young man has to 
begin with knowledge of culture, not even with knowledge of life and still 
less with life and experience itself. And this knowledge of culture is in¬ 
stilled or stirred into the youth as historical knowledge; that is, his head is 
filled with an enormous number of concepts which are drawn from the 
highly mediate knowledge of past ages and peoples, not from the im¬ 
mediate perception of life. His desire to experience something himself and 
to feel a coherent living system of his own experiences grow within—such 
a desire is anaesthetized and as it were intoxicated, namely with the rank 
illusion that it is possible in a few years to summarize within oneself the 
highest and most remarkable experiences of ancient times and precisely the 
highest times. It is the same absurd method which leads our young 
painters and sculptors into salons and art galleries rather than into the 
workshop of a master and above all into the sole workshop of the sole 
mistress, nature. As though one could cursorily amble around in history 
and so glean from past times their techniques and skills, the true harvest of 
their lives! As though life itself were not a craft which has to be learned 
from the beginning and continuously practiced without stint if it is not to 
breed a crawling brood of botchers and babblers! — 

Plato considered it necessary that the first generation of his new society 
(in the perfect state) be educated with the help of a powerful lie-in-need; 
children are to learn to believe that all of them have already dwelled 
dreaming under the earth for a time where they were kneaded and shaped 
by the master artisan of nature. Impossible to rebel against this past! Im¬ 
possible to oppose the work of gods! It is to count as an unbreakable law 
of nature: who is born as a philosopher has gold in his body, who as a 


§10 


61 


guardian only silver, who as a worker only iron and bronze. Plato ex¬ 
plains that just as it is not possible to mix these metals so it is not to be 
possible ever to topple and confuse the caste order; the belief in the aeterna 
veritas bb of this order is the foundation of the new education and therewith 
of the new state. —And so the modern German too believes in the aeterna 
veritas of his education, of his kind of culture: and still this belief will fail, 
just as the Platonic state would have failed, if once the lie-in-need is con¬ 
fronted with a truth-in-need : that the German has no culture, because as a 
result of his education he cannot have it at all. He wants the flower 
without root and stem: that is, he wants it in vain. That is the simple truth, 
an unpleasant and rude, a real truth-in-need. 

In this truth-in-need, however, our first generation must be raised; cer¬ 
tainly it will suffer the most from this truth, for through it it must raise 
itself, and even itself against itself, into a new habit and nature out of an 
old and first nature and habit: so that it could talk to itself in old Spanish: 
“Defienda me Dios de my", God preserve me from myself, namely from 
the nature I have already acquired by my upbringing. It must taste this 
truth drop by drop, taste it as a bitter and violent medicine, and each in¬ 
dividual of this generation must bring himself to a judgment about himself 
which as a general judgment about a whole age he would be able to endure 
more easily: we are without culture, still more, we are spoiled for living, 
for correct and simple seeing and hearing, for the happy grasping of the 
nearest and natural, and so far do not even have the foundation of a 
culture because we ourselves are not convinced of having a true life in us. 
Crumbled and fallen apart, on the whole half mechanically divided into an 
inside and an outside, sown with concepts as with dragon's teeth, 
engendering concept-dragons, in addition suffering from the sickness of 
words and without trust in any feeling of our own which has not yet been 
rubber-stamped with words: as such an unalive and yet uncannily active 
factory of concepts and words I may perhaps still have the right to say 
about myself cogito, ergo sum 67 but not vivo, ergo cogito. b8 Empty 
"being" but not full and green "life" is guaranteed me; my original feeling 
only guarantees that I am a thinking, not a living being, that I am not an 
animal but at most a cogital. First give me life and I will make you a 
culture from it! —so calls each individual of this first generation, and all 
these individuals will recognize each other by this call. Who will give them 
life? 

No god and no man: only their own youth : unfetter it and you will have 
freed life along with it. For life only lay concealed, in prison, it is not yet 

66. Eternal truth. 

67. I think, therefore I am. 

68. I live, therefore I think. 


62 On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 

withered and dead—ask yourselves! 

But it is sick, this unfettered life, and must be healed. Many ills ail it and 
it does not only suffer from the memory of its fetters—it suffers, so far as 
we are principally concerned here, from the historical malady. The excess 
of history has attacked the plastic powers of life, it no longer understands 
how to avail itself of the past as hearty nourishment. The malady is ter¬ 
rible, and yet! if youth did not have the clairvoyant gift of nature no one 
would know that it is a malady and that a paradise of health has been lost. 
This same youth also guesses with the curative instinct of that same nature 
how that paradise is to be regained; it knows the ointments and medicines 
for the historical malady, for the excess of the historical: and what are 
they called? 

Do not be surprised, they bear the names of poisons: the antidotes to the 
historical are called—the unhistorical and the superhistorical. With these 
names we return to the beginnings of our essay and to their calm. 

By the word 'the unhistorical' I denote the art and the strength of being 
able to forget and enclose oneself in a limited horizon: superhistorical' I 
call the powers which guide the eye away from becoming and toward that 
which gives existence an eternal and stable character, toward art and 
religion. Science —for it is science which would speak of poisons—sees in 
that force, in these powers, hostile powers and forces: for it only takes the 
observation of things to be the true and correct one, that is, to be scientific 
observation, which everywhere sees what has come to be, the historical, 
and nowhere being, the eternal; it lives in inner contradiction with the 
eternalizing powers of art and religion so far as it hates forgetting, the 
death of knowledge, so far as it seeks to remove all horizon-limitations 
and throws man into an endless-unlimited light-wave-sea of known 
becoming. 

If only he could live therein! As in an earthquake cities collapse and 
become deserted and man erects his house on volcanic ground only hastily 
and trembling with fear, so life itself collapses into itself and becomes fee¬ 
ble and discouraged when the concept-quake which science provokes 
takes from man the foundation of his security and calm, the belief in the 
enduring and eternal. Now, is life to rule over knowledge, over science, or 
is knowledge to rule over life? Which of these two authorities is the higher 
and decisive one? No one will doubt: life is the higher, the ruling author¬ 
ity, for any knowledge which destroys life would also have destroyed 
itself. Knowledge presupposes life and so has the same interest in the 
preservation of life which every being has in its own continuing existence. 
Thus science requires a higher supervision and guarding: a hygiene of life 
is placed close beside science and one proposition of this hygiene would 
read: the unhistorical and the superhistorical are the natural antidotes to 
the stifling of life by history, to the historical malady. It is probable that 


§10 


63 


we, the historically sick, will also have to suffer from the antidotes. But 
that we suffer from them is no proof that the treatment is incorrect. 

And here I recognize the mission of that youth, that first generation of 
fighters and serpent slayers which precedes a happier and more beautiful 
culture and humanity without having more than an inkling full of promise 
of this future happiness and beauty to come. This youth will suffer from 
the malady and the antidote at the same time: and nevertheless they 
believe to be entitled to boast of stronger health and in general of a more 
natural nature than their forebears, the educated "men" and "old men" of 
the present. But it is their mission to shake the concepts which that present 
has of "health" and "education", and to generate ridicule and hatred 
against such hybrid concept-monsters; and the hallmark of their own 
robust health is to be just this that they, namely this youth, can themselves 
use no concept, no party slogans from the present store of current word 
and concept coinage to designate their own essence, but are only con¬ 
vinced at every appropriate moment by a power active in them, a fighting, 
eliminating and separating power, and by an ever heightened sense of life. 
One may deny that this youth already possesses culture—but for what 
youth would that be a reproach? One may speak of their lack of refine¬ 
ment and moderation—but they are not yet old and wise enough to know 
their place; but above all they need not feign and defend a ready-made 
culture and they enjoy all the consolations and privileges of youth, 
especially the privilege of courageous heedless honesty and the inspiring 
consolation of hope. 

I know that these hopeful ones intimately understand all these 
generalities and that with their very own experience they will translate 
them for themselves into a doctrine meant personally; the others may 
meanwhile perceive nothing but covered bowls which may well be empty: 
until one day to their surprise they see with their own eyes that the bowls 
are full and that attacks, demands, drives to life, passions lay boxed up 
and pressed together in these generalities which could not remain covered 
long. Referring these doubters to time, which brings everything to light, I 
turn in conclusion to that company of hopeful ones to tell them in a 
parable the course and progress of their cure, their rescue from the 
historical malady, and so their own history to the point in time at which 
they will again be well enough to engage in studying history anew and to 
use history under the dominion of life in that threefold sense, namely 
monumental or antiquarian or critical. At that point in time they will be 
more ignorant than the "educated" of the present: for they will have 
unlearned much and moreover will have lost all inclination even to look at 
what those educated ones want to know above all; their distinguishing 
characteristics, seen from the perspective of those educated ones, are 
precisely their lack of education, their indifference and reserve toward 
much that is famous, even toward much that is good. But at that final 


64 


On the Advantage and Disadvantage of History for Life 


point in their cure they have become human again and have ceased to be 
humanoid aggregates—that is something! Those are still hopes! Do not 
your hearts leap for joy at the thought, you hopeful ones? 

And how do we arrive at that goal? you will ask. Already at the begin¬ 
ning of a journey to that goal the Delphic god calls his motto to you: 
"Know thyself". It is a hard motto: for that god "does not conceal and 
does not reveal, but only indicates" 69 as Heraclitus has said. What does he 
point out to you? 

There have been centuries in which the Greeks found themselves in a 
danger similar to the one in which we find ourselves, namely of being 
swamped by what is alien and past, of perishing through "history". Never 
have they lived proudly untouchable: for a long time their "culture" was 
rather a chaos of foreign, Semitic, Babylonian, Lydian and Egyptian forms 
and concepts, and their religion a veritable battle of gods of the whole 
orient: similarly perhaps, as "German culture" and religion is now an in¬ 
ternally battling chaos of all foreign countries, of all antiquity. And never¬ 
theless Hellenic culture became no aggregate, thanks to that Apollinian 
motto. The Greeks learned gradually to organize chaos by reflecting on 
themselves in accordance with the Delphic teaching, that is, by reflecting 
on their genuine needs, and letting their sham needs die out. Thus they 
took possession of themselves again; they did not long remain the 
overloaded heirs and epigoni of the whole orient; after a difficult struggle 
with themselves and through the practical interpretation of that motto 
they even became the happiest enrichers and increasers of the inherited 
treasure and the firstcomers and models of all coming cultured peoples. 

This is a parable for each one of us: he must organize the chaos within 
himself by reflecting on his genuine needs. His honesty, his sound and 
truthful character must at some time rebel against secondhand thought, 
secondhand learning and imitation; then he will begin to comprehend that 
culture can be something other still than decoration of life , that is, fun¬ 
damentally always only dissimulation and disguise; for all adornment 
hides what it adorns. Thus the Greek concept of culture—in contrast to 
the Romance concept—will be unveiled to him, the concept of culture as a 
new and improved nature, without inside and outside, without dissimula¬ 
tion and convention, of culture as the accord of life, thought, appearing 
and willing. Thus he will learn from his own experience that it was 
through higher strength of ethical nature that the Greeks achieved a vic¬ 
tory over all other cultures and that every increase of truthfulness must 
also be a preparatory advancement of true culture: even if this truthfulness 
may on occasion seriously harm the notion of culture which just then en¬ 
joys respect, even if it occasions the fall of an entire decorative culture. 


69. Fragment B93. 




'
